The Letter of Peter to Philip
The Letter of Peter
Which He Sent to Philip
Peter Writing to Philip (132, 10–133, 8)
Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ, to Philip, our beloved brother and our fellow
apostle, and the brothers who are with you: greetings.
I want you to understand, our brother, that we received orders from our Lord,
the Savior of the whole world, that we should come together to teach and preach
concerning the salvation that was promised us by our Lord Jesus Christ.
But you were separated from us, and you did not wish us to come together and
learn how to organize ourselves that we might tell the good news. So would it be
agreeable to you, our brother, to come according to the orders of our God Jesus?
The Apostles Gather and Jesus Christ Appears (133, 8–135, 8)
When Philip received and read this, he went to Peter, rejoicing with gladness.
Then Peter gathered the others. They went to the mountain called Olivet,
where they used to gather with the blessed Christ when he was in the body.
When the apostles came together and fell on their knees, they prayed in this
way and said:
Father, Father, Father of the light,
you who possess the incorruptions,
hear us,
just as [you] have taken pleasure
in your holy child Jesus Christ.
For he has become for us a luminary 
in the darkness.
Yea, hear us.
And they prayed again and said,

Son of life, Son of immortality,
you who are in the light,
Son, Christ of immortality,
our Redeemer,
give us strength,
because they are searching for us
to kill us.
Then a great light appeared, and the mountain shone from the vision of the
one who appeared. And a voice called out to them and said, “Listen to my words
that I may speak to you. Why are you looking for me? I am Jesus Christ, who is
with you forever.”
The apostles answered and said, “Lord, we would like to understand the
deficiency of the aeons and their fullness. And how are we detained in this
dwelling place? How have we come to this place? In what way shall we leave?
How do we possess the authority of boldness? Why do the powers fight
against us?”
Then a voice called to them from the light and said, “It is you who bear
witness that I have said all these things to you. But because of your unbelief I
shall speak again.
The Deficiency of the Aeons (135, 8–136, 15)
“To begin with, concerning [the deficiency] of the aeons, this is the deficiency.
When the disobedience and foolishness of the Mother appeared, without the
command of the majesty of the Father, she wanted to set up aeons. When she
spoke, the arrogant one followed. But when she left behind a portion, the
arrogant one grabbed it, and it became a deficiency. This is the deficiency of the
aeons.
“When the arrogant one took a portion, he sowed it. He placed powers and
authorities over it, and he confined it within the mortal realms. All the powers
of the world rejoiced that they had been brought forth. But they do not
know the preexistent [Father], since they are strangers to him. Rather, the
arrogant one was given power, and they served him and praised him.
“The arrogant one grew proud because of the praise of the powers. He was
jealous and wanted to make an image in place [of an image] and a form in place
of a form. He assigned the powers within his authority to mold mortal bodies.
And they came into being from a misrepresentation of the appearance that had
come forth.

The Fullness (136, 16–137, 13)
“Concerning the fullness, it is I. I was sent down in the body for the seed
that had fallen away. And I came down to their mortal model. But they did not
recognize me, thinking I was a mortal. I spoke with the one who is mine, and he
listened to me just as you also who have listened today. I gave him authority to
enter into the inheritance of his fatherhood. And I took [him] …filled…
through his salvation. Since he was deficiency, he became fullness.
“Concerning the fact that you are being detained, it is because you are mine.
When you strip yourselves of what is corruptible, you will become luminaries in
the midst of mortal people.
“Concerning the fact that you are to fight against the powers, it is because
they do not have rest like you, since they do not want you to be saved.”
Fighting the Archons (137, 13–138, 7)
The apostles worshiped again and said, “Lord, tell us, how shall we fight against
the rulers, since the rulers are over us?”
A voice called out to them from the appearance and said, “You must fight
against them like this, for the rulers fight against the inner person. You must
fight against them like this: come together and teach salvation in the world with
a promise. And arm yourselves with my Father’s power, and express your
prayer, and surely the Father will help you, as he helped you by sending me.
 Don’t [be afraid. I am with you forever], as I already said to you when I
was in the body.”
Then came lightning and thunder from heaven, and what appeared to them
there was taken up to heaven.
The Apostles Return to Jerusalem (138, 7–139, 9)
The apostles thanked the Lord with every praise and returned to Jerusalem.
As they were going up, they spoke with each other on the way about the light
that had appeared. And a discussion arose about the Lord. They said, “If even
our Lord suffered, how much more are we to suffer?”
Peter answered and said, “He suffered for us, and we must also suffer for
our smallness.”
Then a voice called to them and said, “I often told you that you must suffer.
You must be brought to synagogues and governors so that you will suffer. But
the one who will not suffer also [will] not …[my] Father…that he
may….”

The apostles rejoiced greatly and went up to Jerusalem. They went up to the
temple and taught salvation in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and they
healed a crowd.
Peter Preaches (139, 9–140, 1)
Peter opened his mouth and said to his disciples, “When our Lord Jesus was in
the body, he indicated everything to us, for he came down. My brothers, listen to
my voice.”
He was filled with holy spirit and spoke as follows:
“Our luminary Jesus [came] down
and was crucified.
He wore a crown of thorns,
put on a purple robe,
was hanged on wood,
was buried in a tomb,
and he rose from the dead.
“My brothers, Jesus is a stranger to this suffering. But we are the ones who
have suffered through the Mother’s transgression. For this reason he did
everything symbolically among us. The Lord Jesus, Son of the Father’s
immeasurable glory, is the author of our life.
“My brothers, let’s not listen to these lawless ones nor walk in ….”
The Apostles Disperse to Preach (140, 1–27)
Peter assembled [the others] and said, “[Our Lord] Jesus Christ, author of our
rest, give us a spirit of understanding, so we also may perform great deeds.”
Then Peter and the other apostles saw and were filled with holy spirit. Each
one performed healings, and they left to preach the Lord Jesus.
They gathered with their companions, greeted them, and said, “Amen.”
Then Jesus appeared and said to them, “Peace be with [all] of you and
everyone who believes in my name. When you go, you will have joy, grace, and
power. Don’t be afraid. Look, I am with you forever.”
The apostles parted from each other with four words, to preach. And they
went in the power of Jesus, in peace.
