1문단: Namo Guru Manjughoshaya. Homage to the lord of union, Master over the iron elements of birth, death and between, the bases of purification, Over their transformation into gold by the two stages of the profound path, the purifiers, And over the precious Three Bodies of purity, the fruits of purification.
2문단: In order to know the mode of procedure of the two stages of Highest Yoga Mantra, it is very important to understand the presentation of the bases of purification, the three basic bodies - birth, death and intermediate state. For, through the profound short path of Highest Yoga Mantra, the body of union having the seven features of god and goddess facing each other can be actualized in one short lifetime of this degenerate era. Therefore, I will explain birth, death and the intermediate state - the bases purified by the two stages of the path. The explanation has three parts: (1) the stages of death, (2) the stages of achieving the intermediate state, and (3) the way that a being in the intermediate state takes birth.
3문단: During the first aeon [after formation of this world system], the humans of this world had seven features - spontaneous birth, an immeasurable life-span, all sense faculties, a body pervaded by its own light, adornment with similitudes of the major and minor marks [of a Buddha], sustenance by the food of joy without eating coarse food, and magically flying in the sky.
4문단: However, due to activation of predispositions established by attachment to food [in previous lives], they ate coarse sustenance. Then, when the unrefined part of the food turned into faeces and urine, the male and female organs protruded as openings for excretion.
5문단: Two who possessed predispositions established by copulation in former [lives] became attached to each other and, in dependence on their lying together, a sentient being formed in the womb. Through these steps, birth from a womb came to be.
6문단: Womb-born humans of this world are said to have the six constituents - earth, water, fire, wind, channels and drops. Or [according to another interpretation] the six constituents are bone, marrow and regenerative fluid obtained from the father, and flesh, skin and blood obtained from the mother.
7문단: Whoever is a person definite to become enlightened in one short lifetime of this degenerate era, through practising from the beginning the path of Highest Yoga Mantra, is necessarily such a womb-born human of this world having the six constituents.
8문단: The bodies of humans of this world have seventy-two thousand channels as well as the right, left, and central channels.
9문단: At the time of death all the winds in the seventy-two thousand channels gather in the right and left channels. Then the winds in these two dissolve into the central channel.
10문단: The winds in the upper and lower parts of the central channel finally dissolve into the indestructible life-bearing wind at the heart. The white and red constituents exist in the manner of a closed [round] case [with a white drop on top and a red one on the bottom] inside the central channel at the channel-wheel of the heart. In the centre of this closed case is the one entity of the very subtle wind and mind.
11문단: [Death occurs in this way] because, except for this very subtle wind, if the slightest wind that acts as a basis of consciousness dwells in any part of the body, death is not possible.
12문단: Humans must die by way of the dissolution of the twenty-five gross objects - five aggregates, four constituents, six sources, five objects and five basic wisdoms.
13문단: Initially, the five phenomena on the level of the aggregate of forms dissolve simultaneously; they are the aggregate of forms, the basic mirror-like wisdom, the earth constituent, the eye sense and the visible forms [colours and shapes] included within one's own continuum. As the external sign of the dissolution of the form aggregate, one's limbs become smaller than before, and one's body becomes weak and powerless.
14문단: The basic mirror-like wisdom is explained to be an [ordinary] consciousness to which many objects appear simultaneously and clearly, just as reflections appear in a mirror. As an external sign of its dissolution, one's sight becomes unclear and dark.
15문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the earth constituent, the body becomes very thin, the limbs loose, and one has the sense that the body is sinking under the earth.
16문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the eye sense power, one cannot open or close the eyes.
17문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the visible forms included within one's own continuum, the lustre of one's body diminishes and one's strength is consumed.
18문단: The internal sign of the dissolution of these five is the arising of a bluish appearance called 'like a mirage'. It is like an appearance of water when the light of the sun strikes a desert in the summer.
19문단: After that, the five phenomena on the level of the aggregate of feelings dissolve simultaneously. When the aggregate of feelings dissolves, the external sign is that the body consciousness can no longer experience the pleasure, pain and neutral feelings which accompany the sense consciousnesses.
20문단: The basic wisdom of equality is explained to be an [ordinary] consciousness that is mindful of pleasure, pain and neutral feelings as of one type, that is to say, as feeling. As an external sign of its dissolution, one is no longer mindful of the pleasure, pain and neutral feelings that accompany the mental consciousness.
21문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the water constituent, one’s saliva, sweat, urine, blood and regenerative fluid dry greatly.
22문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the ear sense power, one can no longer hear external or internal sounds.
23문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the sounds included within one’s own continuum, the ur sound inside the ears no longer arises.
24문단: The internal sign of the dissolution of these five is the dawning of an appearance called ‘like smoke’, which is like blue puffs of smoke. It is similar to smoke billowing from a chimney in the midst of a mass of smoke.
25문단: After that, the five phenomena on the level of the aggregate of discriminations dissolve simultaneously. As an external sign of the dissolution of the aggregate of discriminations, one is no longer mindful of the affairs of close persons such as one’s parents.
26문단: The basic wisdom of analysis is explained to be an [ordinary] consciousness that is mindful of the individual names [purposes, and so forth] of close persons. As a sign of its dissolution, one can no longer remember the names even of one’s parents.
27문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the fire constituent, the warmth of the body diminishes, whereupon the capacity to digest food and drink is lost.
28문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the nose sense power, the inhalation of wind [air] through the nose is weak whereas the exhalation is strong and lengthy, and the breaths are as if piled one on top of the other.
29문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the odours included within one’s own continuum, one cannot smell any fragrant or unfragrant odours.
30문단: The internal sign of the dissolution of these five is the arising of an appearance called ‘like fireflies’. It is like burning red sparks seen within puffs of smoke rising from a chimney, or like red sparks on the soot on the bottom of a pan used for parching grain.
31문단: After that, the five phenomena on the level of the aggregate of compositional factors dissolve simultaneously. The external sign of the dissolution of this aggregate is that one cannot perform physical actions such as moving about.
32문단: The basic wisdom of achieving activities is explained to be a consciousness that is mindful of external worldly activities, purposes and so forth [of this and future lives, as well as how to achieve them]. As an external sign of its dissolution, one is no longer mindful of these.
33문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the wind constituent, the ten winds - the [gross] life-bearing wind and so forth - shift from their own abodes to the heart, and the breath ceases to move in and out.
34문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the tongue sense power, the tongue becomes thick and short, and its root turns blue.
35문단: As an external sign of the dissolution of the tastes included within one’s own continuum, one can no longer experience the six tastes [sweet, sour, bitter, astringent, pungent and salty].
36문단: Since at this point the body sense power and touches must also dissolve, as an external sign of their dissolution one can no longer experience any smoothness or roughness.
37문단: The internal sign of the dissolution of these seven is the arising of an appearance called ‘like a burning butter-lamp’. It is like the sputtering point of a butter-lamp’s flame when it is about to go out.
38문단: With respect to how the former elements dissolve into the latter, the capacity of [the wind associated with] a former element [in the list of earth, water, fire and wind] to act as a basis of consciousness is withdrawn, and the capacity of a latter one to do so becomes more manifest. This is called the dissolution of a former element into a latter one, but is not a case of one element’s becoming of the nature of another.
39문단: That earth dissolves into water means that the capacity of the earth-wind to act as a basis of consciousness degenerates, whereupon the capacity of the water-wind to act as a basis of consciousness becomes more manifest. Thus, since this is like a transference of the capacity of the former to the latter, it is said that earth dissolves into water, but it is not that ordinary earth dissolves into ordinary water.
40문단: This applies to the other dissolutions as well.
41문단: After the four elements dissolve, the five phenomena on the level of the aggregate of consciousness must dawn in stages. These five are the mind of the eighty indicative conceptions, the mind of radiant white appearance, the mind of radiant red increase, the mind of radiant black near-attainment, and the mind of the clear light of death.
42문단: The mind of the eighty indicative conceptions and the wind which serves as its mount must dissolve prior to the radiant white appearance because its mode of apprehension and that of the mind of appearance are discordant. Also, since there is a great difference of coarseness and subtlety between these two, coarse minds such as those of the eighty conceptions cannot exist at the time of [the white] appearance.
43문단: When the eighty indicative conceptions as well as the wind that serves as their mount begin to dissolve into the radiant white appearance, an appearance like a burning butter-lamp arises.
44문단: The sign of the mind of appearance itself - when those eighty indicative conceptions have dissolved into it - is the dawning of extreme clarity and vacuity as well as of light with a white aspect like a night sky pervaded by moonlight in the autumn when the sky is free of defilement.
45문단: With respect to the cause of such an appearance, all the winds in the right and left channels above the heart have entered the central channel through its upper opening [at the top of the head]. Through the force of this, the knot of the channels at the top of the head is loosened, and, since the white drop obtained from the father - which has the aspect of the syllable ham upside-down - has the nature of water, it comes downward. When it arrives on top of the six-circled knot of the right and left channels at the heart, the radiant white appearance arises. Thus, this is not a case of an appearance of moonlight and so forth shining from the outside. It is called ‘appearance’ [because an appearance like moonlight dawns] and ‘the empty’ [because of being devoid of the eighty conceptions as well as the wind that serves as their mount].
46문단: After that, the mind of appearance as well as the wind that serves as its mount dissolves into the mind of increase. When the mind of increase dawns, a red or orange appearance, empty and vacuous but much clearer than before, shines like an autumn sky, free of defilement and pervaded by sunlight.
47문단: With respect to its cause, all the winds in the right and left channels below the heart have entered the central channel through its lower opening [at the base of the spine or in the sexual organ]. Through the force of this, the knot of the channel-wheel in the jewel [sexual organ] and the knot of the channel-wheel at the navel gradually loosen. Thereby, the red drop that is obtained from the mother, which exists in the form of the single [vertical] line of a short a [in Sanskrit, when added to make a long a] in the middle of the channel-wheel at the navel, comes upward. Until it arrives below the six-circled knot of the right and left channels at the heart, a red or orange appearance arises. Thus, this is not a case of the illumination of sunlight and so forth shining from outside. It is called ‘increase of appearance’ [because of being very vivid like sunlight] and ‘the very-empty’ [because of being devoid of the mind of appearance as well as the wind that serves as its mount].
48문단: After that, the mind of increase, together with the wind that serves as its mount, dissolves into the mind of near-attainment. During the first part there dawns a vacuous black appearance, like an autumn sky free of defilement and pervaded by the thick darkness of the beginning of night.
49문단: The upper and lower winds inside the central channel have gathered within that channel at the heart, and through the force of this the six-circled knot of the right and left channels at the heart is loosened. Thereupon, the white drop that is above [in the aspect of the syllable ham upside-down] descends, and the red drop that is below [in the aspect of a vertical line] ascends. These enter into the middle of the white and red indestructible drops that exist in the manner of a closed case in the centre of the central channel at the heart. Due to their meeting, the radiant appearance of near-attainment arises; thus, it is not a case of an appearance of darkness and so forth coming from the outside. It is called ‘near-attainment’ [because of being near the clear light] and ‘the great-empty’ [because of being devoid of the mind of increase as well as the wind that serves as its mount].
50문단: The first part of the mind of near-attainment is accompanied by a sense of an object; but, during the latter part, one is not mindful of any object, as if swooning unconsciously, confounded in darkness. Then all the winds and minds that adventitiously arise from the very subtle wind and mind cease. The latter portion of the mind of near-attainment without mindfulness continues until the mindfulness of the very subtle wind and mind - which has existed [non-manifestly] from the beginning in the ordinary state - is activated. When that occurs, the clear light of death dawns.
51문단: The definition of a mind of radiant white appearance is: a mental consciousness (1) which occurs upon the dissolution of the conceptions and until their movement [that is, reinstatement], (2) to which an appearance of radiant white vacuity dawns, which is like an autumn sky, free of defilement and pervaded by moonlight, and (3) to which no other coarse dualistic appearance appears.
52문단: The definition of a mind of increase of appearance is: a mental consciousness (1) which occurs upon the dissolution of the conceptions and until their movement [reinstatement], (2) to which an appearance of radiant red vacuity dawns, which is like an autumn sky, free of defilement and pervaded by sunlight, and (3) to which no other coarse dualistic appearance appears.
53문단: The definition of a mind of near-attainment is: a mental consciousness (1) which occurs upon the dissolution of the conceptions and until their movement [reinstatement], (2) to which an appearance of radiant black vacuity dawns, which is like an autumn sky, free of defilement and pervaded by the thick darkness of the beginning of night, and (3) to which no other coarse dualistic appearance appears.
54문단: When the mind of near-attainment dissolves into the clear light, the second portion of the mind of near-attainment that is without mindfulness is cleared away. Without even the slightest coarse dualistic appearance, an appearance of very clear vacuity dawns. It is like the natural colour of a dawn sky in autumn, free of the three causes of pollution - moonlight, sunlight and darkness. This appearance is like that of a consciousness in meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness.
55문단: With respect to the cause of the clear light appearance, the white and red drops dissolve [respectively] into the white and red indestructible drops [at the heart], and all the winds inside the central channel dissolve into the very subtle life-bearing wind. Through this, the very subtle wind and mind that have existed in the ordinary state from the beginning [in a nonmanifest state] are made manifest, whereby such an appearance dawns. Thus this is not a case of an appearance of vacuous sky from the outside. This is called the ‘clear light of death’ and 'the all-empty’ [because of being devoid of the eighty conceptions, and of appearance, increase and near-attainment as well as of the winds that serve as their mounts]. It is actual death.
56문단: This is the basic Truth Body [so called because it is the basis of purification to be transformed into a Truth Body]. The vacuity is called the basic Nature Body, and the mind that takes it as its object is called the basic Realization Wisdom Truth Body.
57문단: [Most] ordinary humans remain in the clear light for three days, whereupon the signs of the white and red constituents occur. A little blood and phlegm emerge from the nose and/or sexual organ - these being the unrefined portion of the drops that have dissolved at the heart. However, in cases where the physical constituents have been severely consumed by disease, the signs of the red and white constituents do not occur no matter how many days pass. Such persons might not remain in the clear light for even a day.
58문단: Also, it is said that yogis with higher and lower realization can mix the clear light with the Truth Body and remain in this for a greater or lesser number of [extra] days.
59문단: With respect to the way that the minds of appearance, increase and near-attainment dissolve, the capacity of the former mind ceases and the latter becomes more manifest. This is called a dissolution of the former into the latter, but it is not that the former becomes of the nature of the latter.
60문단: The reason why an autumn sky is used in the example is that the summer rains have suppressed well the rising of earth particles into intermediate space, and the sky is free from the obstructions of clouds. Since a composite of these two features occurs frequently with great clarity during the autumn, an autumn sky is used in the example. Also, just as space is a vacuity that is a mere negation of coarse obstructive contact, so appearances of coarse conceptuality have disappeared for those minds and an appearance of vacuity dawns during the four ‘empties’ [empty, very-empty, great-empty and all-empty]. In these two respects, the modes of appearance [in these four states] are similar to an autumn sky, and so it is used as the example. It is not that appearances of the sky and so forth dawn on these occasions.
61문단: Question: If, prior to the mind of appearance, the eighty indicative conceptions as well as the winds that serve as their mounts have dissolved, is it not true that there would be no winds to dissolve at the times of appearance, increase and near-attainment?
 Answer: In general, winds are of many types, gross and subtle; thus, although the gross have finished dissolving, the subtle still exist.


62문단: Therefore, the time when only subtle winds act as a basis of consciousness occurs from the dissolving of wind [from among the four elements] into appearance until the dissolving of near-attainment into clear light.


63문단: During the four empties, coarse conventional appearances vanish for the mind, due to the fact that these minds, as well as the appearance of objects, have become more subtle than the former minds and objects.
 With these, a vacuity dawns; but this is not a case of taking emptiness as an object of mind.


64문단: On these occasions, it is only appearances of true existence that arise to an ordinary being who has not cultivated the path; appearances of non-true existence do not.


65문단: This is because the four empties dawn for all dying sentient beings; if emptiness were realized during death, everyone would, absurdly, be effortlessly freed [from cyclic existence].
 At the time of clear light an ordinary being generates the fright that he will be annihilated.
 Ordinary beings experience the clear light of death in the manner of its appearing without being ascertained, not with a mind of ascertainment.


66문단: The clear light of death is the ‘mother’ clear light, whereas that which dawns through the power of meditation during sleep and the waking state while on the spiritual path is called the ‘son’ clear light.
 Meditation that mixes these two during the clear light of death is called mixing the mother and son clear lights.


67문단: Question: Is the clear light of death in general a fully qualified clear light? Answer: Although the mother and son clear lights that are mixed and stabilized within the view [of emptiness] by a yogi are a fully qualified clear light, the clear light of death that dawns for an ordinary being - not by the power of meditation but of its own accord - is a case of imputing the name ‘clear light’ to just a stoppage of gross dualistic appearance. It is not fully qualified.
68문단: In general, clear light is of two types - the objective clear light that is the subtle emptiness [of inherent existence], and the subjective clear light that is the wisdom consciousness realizing this emptiness.
69문단: [As will be explained in Chapter Four] these stages of death are brought within the path by the practice of taking death as the Truth Body in the stages of generation and completion of Highest Yoga Mantra. They are also the main bases of purifica tion by means of the metaphoric and actual clear lights. Therefore, it is very important to form a good understanding of them.
70문단: 2 The Stages of Achieving the Intermediate State At the end of howsoever long the mind of clear light abides without any movement, a slight movement that is a mere quiver occurs within, it. This initiates the rising from the clear light. At this point, the very subtle wind and mind leave the opened drop of the white and red constituents at the heart and pass outside. The body is left, and a body of the intermediate state is established.
71문단: Simultaneously, the white constituent at the heart descends and emerges from the point of the male or female sign, while the red constituent rises and emerges from the nose.
72문단: The wind that serves as the mount of the clear light of death, and has the five lights, acts as the substantial cause of the body of the intermediate state. The colour of the very subtle life-bearing wind itself is white, but it emits a radiance of five colours - white, red, yellow, green and blue. This life-bearing wind also acts as the cooperative cause of the mind of the intermediate state. The mind of the clear light of death acts as the cooperative cause of the body and the substantial cause of the mind of the intermediate state. In dependence on this, the intermediate state, which has a body of wind with the aspect of the human being as which one is to be reborn, is established in actuality, separate from the old aggregates of [the previous lifetime which was] a fruition [of prior actions].
73문단: At that time, the three minds of appearance, increase and near-attainment that were explained earlier appear in reverse order. The dawning of the radiant black mind of near-attainment of the reverse process, the stoppage of the clear light of death and the achievement of the intermediate state are simultaneous.
74문단: For many texts - such as the upper [Mahayana] and lower [Hinayana] Knowledges (Abhidharma) and Asanga's Treatises on the Levels - say that the stoppage of the death state and the achievement of the intermediate state are simultaneous, like [the movement up and down of] the higher and lower ends of a scale. Also, since a being of the intermediate state is spontaneously born, all of its major and secondary limbs are established simultaneously.
75문단: The mind immediately upon achieving the intermediate state is that of near-attainment of the reverse process. From it, the mind of increase of the reverse process is generated; from this, appearance and, from appearance, the eighty indicative conceptions. At these times, the signs - from the [black] near- attainment to mirage - occur in scries but in reverse order from that explained earlier. The order now is: 1 Clear light 2 Radiant black near-attainment 3 Radiant red increase 4 Radiant white appearance 5 Flame of a butter-lamp 6 Fireflies 7 Smoke 8 Mirage. This being of the intermediate state rushes about seeking a birthplace, odours [for nourishment] and so forth.
76문단: At these times, the signs - from the [black] near-attainment to mirage - occur in series but in reverse order from that explained earlier.
77문단: Having a very subtle mental body which is achieved from wind alone, and having abandoned the coarse body of the elements with heavy and gross flesh, blood and so forth, it is called a basic Enjoyment Body [in that it is the basis of purification to be transformed into an Enjoyment Body]. It is also called a smell-eater [because it feeds on odours].
78문단: Question: What example is there for the existence of such an intermediate state? Answer: Nowadays when we go to sleep, the four signs [mirage, smoke, fireflies, and flame of a butter-lamp] as well as the four empties [empty, very-empty, great-empty and all-empty] of sleep dawn like those at the time of death, but only briefly. The clear light of sleep [which is coarser than that of death] dawns...
79문단: ...and when we begin to rise from that, we do so in a dream body [this being like rising from the clear light of death in a body of the intermediate state]. Having risen from the clear light of sleep, a dream body is achieved, and we perform the various activities of dreamtime.
80문단: Then, when we begin to awaken from sleep, the wind body of dream dissolves from the outside like breath on a mirror and, gathering at the heart, dissolves into the very subtle wind and mind that are an undifferentiable entity inside the central channel at the heart of the old mental and physical aggregates. Thereupon, we awaken from sleep and perform various activities.
81문단: The entity of such an intermediate being has five features: 1 It has all sense faculties. 2 Since it has been born spontaneously, all its major and secondary limbs are simultaneously completed. 3 Since it has a subtle body, it cannot be destroyed even by a diamond. 4 Except for birthplaces, such as the mother’s womb, it is not obstructed even by mountains, fences and so forth. 5 Through the force of karmic powers it can in an instant go wherever it wants and not even a Buddha can stop it.
82문단: Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge explains that once the intermediate state of a particular being is achieved, it does not change to another type of migration. However, Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge says that it is not certain that, once an intermediate state of a particular type of being has been achieved, it will necessarily be born that way, there being reversals into another type of migration. However, in the systems of both the lower [Hinayana] and upper [Mahayana] Knowledges there are persons who attain the state of a Foe Destroyer on the support of the intermediate state; therefore, it should not be asserted that one necessarily has to take rebirth from it.
83문단: Synonyms. Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge explains that ‘mind-arisen’, ‘seeker of existence’, ‘smell-eater’, ‘intermediate state’ and ‘establishing existence’ are synonyms.
84문단: Length of Life. The longest [intermediate state] is seven days; however, since there are cases of transmigrating to the next birth immediately upon achieving the intermediate state when the causes for rebirth aggregate, there is no certainty. If within seven days the causes of birth do not aggregate, at the end of the seventh a small death occurs whereupon an[other] intermediate state is achieved. Asanga’s Actuality of the Levels (Bhiimivastu) says that, when in that manner seven weeks have passed, the causes for rebirth definitely aggregate and rebirth is necessarily taken.
85문단: Death in the intermediate state. With respect to the mode of the small death at the end of a week, the wind body of the intermediate being gathers in stages from the top and the bottom into the heart, like breath on a mirror gathering from the limits. The eighty indicative conceptions of the intermediate state, as well as the wind that serves as their mount, dissolve. Thereupon, the four signs and the four empties of an intermediate being’s death dawn quickly, and the clear light of death is actualized. Then the wind that serves as the mount of the clear light acts as the substantial cause, and the wind body of an intermediate being is achieved as before, simultaneous with achieving the mind of near-attainment of the reverse process. No matter how many small deaths occur while having the life support of an intermediate being, they are included within the intermediate state [and not the death state].
86문단: Seeing the former body. Asanga’s Actuality of the Levels says that, even when an intermediate being sees its former physical support, due to the force of having severed any relationship with that body, it does not think, ‘My body’, and does not generate a wish to enter it.
87문단: Seven days. Some interpreters have said that the statement that the lifespan of an intermediate being is seven days refers to the days of the individual types of migrators [some of which are very long compared to human days]. However, this is not correct because an intermediate being [who is to be reborn] as a hell-being or as a god of the form realm would have to dwell in those states for the seven days of those types of beings, resulting in the great absurdity that one would have to assert that there are cases of dwelling in the intermediate state for a great many millions of years without aggregation of the causes of rebirth.
88문단: Mode of exit from the body after death. One who is to be reborn as a hell-being exits from the anus; as a hungry ghost, from the mouth; as an animal, from the urinary passage; as a human, from the eye; as a god of the desire realm, from the navel; as a yaksha, from the nose; as a god of magical accomplishment, or as a ‘probable-human’, from the ear. If one is to be reborn in the form realm, the exit is from the middle of the brow, and if one is to be reborn in the formless realm, it is from the crown of the head. These are set forth in the eighth chapter of the Samputa Tantra (Samputa) and so forth.
89문단: Objection: This contradicts the explanation in Asanga’s Treatises on the Levels and so forth that, when the body is abandoned, the consciousness exits from the heart. Answer: There is no contradiction. When the consciousness exits within the body, it initially does so from the heart; however, when it exits to the outside, it is from these individual doors.
90문단: Question: What does Vasubandhu mean when he says, ‘When dying in stages, the mind dies and exits at the feet, navel, and heart’, and, in his commentary, ‘If one is to be reborn in a bad migration, the consciousness ceases at the feet; as a human, at the navel. If one is to be reborn as a god, or when a Foe Destroyer dies, the consciousness stops at the heart’? Answer: As the commentary explains, the mind ceases at those places, and thus these passages merely indicate different ways that the mental consciousness stops through the force of the body sense’s ceasing in places such as the feet. Since it does not teach that the consciousness exits to the outside from those places, it does not contradict what was explained earlier.
91문단: Perception. Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge explains that intermediate beings are seen by others of similar type and by those with a pure divine eye [that is, clairvoyants]. Concerning that, a divine eye that is attained merely through birth is impure, whereas one attained through the power of former meditation is pure. Vasubandhu’s Commentary on the ‘Treasury of Knowledge’ (Abhidharmakoshabhafhya) also explains that intermediate beings of higher type perceive lower ones.
92문단: Size. Vasubandhu’s Commentary on the ‘Treasury of Knowledge’ explains that an intermediate being of a human of this world has the size of a five- or six-year-old youth. However, it is said that such is not one-pointedly certain.
93문단: Aspect. Asanga’s Actuality of the Levels says that, to an intermediate being of a bad migration [animal, hungry ghost, or hell-being], there appears an outstretched black flag, or night pervaded by darkness; whereas, to an intermediate being of a happy migration [human, demigod or god], there appears an outstretched white cloth, or night pervaded by moonlight.
94문단: Colour. The Sutra of Teaching to Nanda on Entry to the Womb (Ayushmannandagarbhavakrantinirdesha) explains that [the body’s colour in] the intermediate state of a hell-being is like a log burned by fire; of a hungry ghost, like water; of an animal, like smoke; of a god of the desire realm or a human, gold; and of a god of the form realm, white, etc.
95문단: Shape. Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge says that an intermediate being has the fleshly aspect or physical shape of the ‘prior state’ of that migrator as which it will be reborn.
96문단: There are four states: 1 Birth state: the first moment of connecting to the new life. 2 Prior state: existence from the moment after connecting to the new life until the death state. 3 Death state: existence during the last period of death or at the time of experiencing the clear light of death. 4 Intermediate state: existence that occurs between the death state and birth state.
97문단: Mistaking the mere words of the term ‘prior state’, some assert that an intermediate being has the physical aspect of the former life. Also, others, seeing [Asanga’s] explanation that it has the physical shape of the next life, assert that it has the physical aspect of the former life for three and a half days and of the next life for three and a half days. Tsong-ka-pa’s Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path explains that these are only fabrications without correct sources.
98문단: For the word ‘prior’ in the term ‘prior state’ is prior relative to the death state of the next life but not to the intermediate state. This is because Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge says, '. . possessing the fleshly form of the prior state that will occur’, using the future and not the past.
99문단: Also, with regard to the explanation that an intermediate being has the aspect of that sentient being as whom it will be reborn, some say that the intermediate being of a migrator who in his next life will not have all sense faculties also does not have all of them. This is very wrong, because incompleteness of sense faculties, such as eyes, occurs after taking rebirth in a place of birth such as a womb. Also, nowhere does it say that an intermediate being does not have all sense faculties. Furthermore, it would be extremely absurd if, due to the mere explanation that it has the aspect of the being as whom it will be reborn, the intermediate being would have to be similar in all respects.
100문단: Mode of movement. Asanga’s Actuality of the Levels says that an intermediate being of a god proceeds upwards; of a human, straightforward; and of a bad migration, downwards, head first.
101문단: In order to be born in either the desire or form realms, it is necessary to pass through an intermediate state. Therefore, Tsong-ka-pa’s Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path says that the assertion that there is no intermediate state for those who have committed actions of immediate retribution is not correct.
102문단: However, there is no intermediate state for rebirth in a formless realm [limitless space, limitless consciousness, nothingness and peak of cyclic existence]. This is because the aggregates which are the basis of a name of a formless being [that is, the being’s mind and mental factors] are achieved in just the place of death. A person who is to be reborn in a formless realm actualizes a formless meditative stabilization from within the clear light of death. There is no dawning of the mind of near-attainment upon arising from the clear light of death in the reverse process, because such would be a mind of the intermediate state.
103문단: Thus, the formless realm has no place separate from the desire and form realms.
104문단: Special intermediate being. Vasubandhu’s Commentary on the ‘ Treasury of Knowledge and Nagabodhi’s Ordered Stages of the Means of Achieving Guhyasamaja (Samajasadhanavyavasthali say that a special intermediate being, who is a Bodhisattva just one rebirth away from enlightenment, leaves the Joyous Land and enters into the mother’s womb, and that such an intermediate being is a youth adorned with the major and minor marks, with light illuminating a billion sets of four continents.
105문단: Objection: This contradicts Bhadanta Dharmasubhuti’s explanation that [Shakyamuni Buddha] entered the womb in the form of a six-tusked white elephant. Answer: There is no need to assert the process in accordance with that explanation [which is his own fabrication]; however, [it can also be said that] he taught such merely in accordance with the mother’s dream. If it were asserted that an intermediate being who is to be reborn as a human has the aspect of an animal, it would contradict many valid treatises. [Shak-yamuni’s entry into a womb] is asserted to be literal in the Hinayana systems but as merely a display in the Mahayana [because he had earlier attained Buddhahood].
106문단: Conclusion [As will be explained in chapter four] these factors of the intermediate state are brought within the path by the practice of taking the intermediate state as an Enjoyment Body in the stage of generation in Highest Yoga Mantra. They are also the bases of purification by means of the impure and pure illusory bodies [in the stage of completion]. Therefore, it is important to know them in detail.
107문단: 3 Taking Birth The Sutra of Teaching to Nanda on Entry to the Womb says that in order for an intermediate being to take rebirth in a mother’s womb, three favourable conditions must aggregate and three unfavourable ones must be absent: 1 The mother must be free from disease and at a time of non-menstruation. 2 The smell-eater [intermediate being] must be nearby and wish to enter. 3 The male and female must desire each other and meet.
108문단: 4 The mother’s womb must be free from the fault of its centre being like the shape of a barley seed, an ant’s waist or a camel’s mouth, and must not be obstructed by wind, bile or phlegm. 5 Both mother and father must not have faulty seed in the sense of either the semen or blood not descending, or of the one descending before the other, or, though they descend together, of either being rotten. 6 The smell-eater must be free from the fault of not having accumulated an action (karma) for being born as the child of that male and female, who must also be without the fault of not having accumulated an action for becoming its father and mother.
109문단: This is similar in meaning to the statement in a discipline scripture that six states must be manifest.
110문단: A smell-eater who has these six conditions sees in an illusory manner the father and mother lying together. Due to wanting to copulate, if it is to be reborn as a male, it desires the mother and wishes to separate from the father; whereas, if it is to be reborn as a female, it desires the father and wishes to separate from the mother.
111문단: Then, when it begins to embrace the one that is desired, through the force of previous actions it does not perceive any part of the body except the person’s sexual organ, whereby anger is generated. This desire and hatred act as the cause of death, and the intermediate being enters the womb.
112문단: The ‘Many Levels’ chapter of Asanga’s Actuality of the Levels says that, whereas the father and mother are not actually lying together [at that time], the smell-eater mistakenly perceives the semen and blood as such. Vasubandhu’s Commentary on the ‘Treasury of Knowledge’, however, explains that it [actually] sees the father and mother lying together.
113문단: When male and female become absorbed together [in sexual intercourse], through the force of the churning about of their sexual organs the downwards-moving wind shifts upward, and the ordinary inner heat of the triple intersection [of the central, right and left channels at the solar plexus] is ignited. The heat melts the white and red drops, which descend within the empty insides of the seventy-two thousand channels. Through this, body and mind are blissfully satisfied and, at the end, during a period of strong desire, a thick regenerative fluid arises.
114문단: After that, these drops of semen and blood, which definitely do emerge from both male and female, are mixed in the mother’s womb. The consciousness of the dying intermediate being enters into the middle of this, which is like the cream formed on boiled milk.
115문단: With regard to how this occurs, the intermediate being initially enters by any of three doors - mouth of the male, top of the head of the male, or the female’s womb.
116문단: It then associates with the regenerative fluid that has descended from within the seventy-two thousand channels [of the male and female and mixed in the womb]. The winds that cause the movement of conceptuality during the intermediate state dissolve, whereupon the minds of appearance, increase and near-attainment dawn in stages. These and the clear light of the intermediate being’s death appear quickly - merely being generated for a period shorter than those explained earlier at the point of leaving the gross body.
117문단: The signs from mirage to clear light occur, and a continuation of a similar type of the clear light makes - in the centre of the mixed semen and blood - the connection to the new life. The taking of rebirth and the establishment of the near-attainment of the reverse process are simultaneous.
118문단: The first moment of the mind of near-attainment is the basis of designating the verbal convention ‘birth state’, and is the mind of initial connection to the new life in the birthplace.
119문단: From that, the second and following moments of near-attainment are produced; from that, increase; from that, appearance; from appearance, the eighty indicative conceptions, as well as the winds that are their mounts.
120문단: From the wind that is the mount of the mind of appearance, a wind is generated that has a special capacity for acting as a basis of consciousness. From it, a fire constituent that has a special capacity for acting as a basis of consciousness is generated; from that, a water constituent that has such a capacity; and from that, an earth constituent that has such a capacity.
121문단: With regard to the door through which an intermediate being enters the womb, Nagabodhi’s Ordered Stages of the Means of Achieving Guhyasamaja explains that it enters through the door of Vairochana - the top of the head - whereas the Samvarodaya Tantra (Samvarodaya) and the Vajrashekhara Tantra (Vajrashekhara) explain that it enters through the male’s mouth. Therefore, initially, the intermediate being enters through the male’s mouth or top of the head and emerges from his secret place [phallus], entering the mother’s lotus [vagina]. The consciousness of the dying intermediate being makes connection to the new life in the middle of the semen and blood.
122문단: Also, since Vasubandhu’s Commentary on the ‘Treasury of Knowledge’ explains that it enters through the door of the mother’s womb, it should be understood that there are three doors of entry to the womb - the male’s mouth, the top of the male’s head and the door to the female’s womb.
123문단: This presentation has been given in accordance with the mode of entry of a human intermediate being who is to be reborn from a womb. However, since in general an intermediate being is unobstructible, it does not need a hole for a door of entry. For Vasubandhu’s Commentary on the ‘Treasury of Knowledge’ says that it is well known that organisms are found inside a mass of iron that has been split apart. Also, sentient beings exist in very hard rocks and stones that have no openings.
124문단: The Sutra of Teaching to Nanda on Entry to the Womb explains that the womb is below the mother’s stomach and above the end of her large intestine.
125문단: Initially, the oval-shaped foetus is covered on the outside by something like the cream on top of boiled milk; but inside it is very runny. From this point, gross [physical] aggregates are established; thus the subtle and gross bodies that last until death are achieved from the constituents of the four elements. The earth-wind causes holding; the water-wind causes cohesion; the fire-wind causes maturation and non-putrefaction; the wind-wind causes development.
126문단: When the oval-shaped foetus has passed seven days, a new wind is produced and, due to the maturation that occurs by means of it, the foetus becomes viscous both outside and inside, like yogurt, but has not become flesh.
127문단: When another seven days pass, a new wind is produced and, through maturation due to it, the foetus becomes fleshy but cannot withstand pressure.
128문단: After another seven days, it hardens due to maturation by a new wind; the flesh is now hard and can bear pressure.
129문단: When this, in turn, has passed seven days, due to maturation by a new wind the foetus develops legs and arms, in the sense that five protuberances - signs of the two thighs, two shoulders and head - stand out clearly.
130문단: In Nagabodhi’s Ordered Stages of the Means of Achieving Guhyasamaja, these are called the five states in the womb. Vasubandhu’s Commentary on the ‘Treasury of Knowledge’ and the Sutra of Teaching to Nanda on Entry to the Womb [switch the order of the names] for the first two of the five stages, leaving the latter three as before; whereas Asanga’s Actuality of the Levels reverses the first two [as was done in this explanation]. However, it is said that, except for there being different orders in the designation of names, there is no contradiction in the meaning.
131문단: During the fourth week, the white and red drops divide into refined and unrefined portions. From the white arise the three internal treasuries obtained from the father - regenerative fluid, marrow and bone. From the red drops arise the three external treasuries obtained from the mother - flesh, skin and blood.
132문단: The place in the semen and blood where the consciousness initially enters later becomes the heart. In it there is a mass the size of a large white mustard seed [or small pea] which is a composite of four factors: the very subtle wind and mind, and essences of the semen and blood. With that in its middle, the central channel and the right and left ones that each encircle it three times are formed.
133문단: Then, through the force of the upward-moving wind being generated upward and the downward-voiding wind going downward, the central as well as right and left channels develop upward and downward. The top and bottom [of the body at this point] are thin, and the middle is bulbous like the shape of a fish.
134문단: Then, gradually, the five protuberances, and after them the five limbs, hair, nails, body-hair, etc., the physical sense powers, the male or female organ, the breath-wind that moves through the mouth, the eight sources of speech - tongue, palette, and so forth - and the mindfulness which is the movement of the mental consciousness to objects - all these arise in complete form.
135문단: If the child which has developed that way in the womb is a boy, he dwells crouching on the mother’s right side and facing backward toward her backbone. If a girl, she dwells crouching on the mother’s left side and facing forward.
136문단: With regard to the length of time spent in the womb, the Sutra of Teaching to Nanda on Entry to the Womb says that birth occurs at the end of thirty-eight weeks; that would be two hundred and sixty-six days. Asanga’s Actuality of the Levels adds four days, saying that birth occurs after two hundred and seventy days have finished. The Samvarodaya Tantra refers to a mind-possessor that emerges during the tenth month. These three agree in taking the period as nine whole months [a month being four weeks or twenty-eight days] and part of a tenth. [It should be noted that] the days mentioned in the Sutra of Teaching to Nanda on Entry to the Womb and Asanga’s Actuality of the Levels refer to full days [and not certain dates], and the months refer to a period of four weeks [and not calendar months].
137문단: During the thirty-fifth week, the body - that is to say, the aggregates, constituents, sources, limbs, secondary limbs, hair, nails and so forth - the sources of speech - such as tongue and palette - and the mindfulness which is the mental consciousness’s engaging objects are complete. In the thirty-sixth week, the child comes to dislike the womb and generates a wish to leave. In the thirty-seventh week, it generates a discrimination of bad odour and filthiness.
138문단: Finally, in the thirty-eighth week, a wind called ‘secondary’, which is generated from former actions, arises, whereupon the body of the sentient being in the womb turns upside down. With its two arms contracted, it approaches the door of the uterus from the mother’s womb.
139문단: Then a wind called ‘facing downward’, which is generated from former actions, arises, whereupon the sentient being in the womb is forced into the vagina with its head down and feet up. At the end of the thirty-eighth week, it emerges outside and becomes an object of ordinary sight. Successively, the five states after birth - childhood, youth, adulthood, middle age and old age - occur.
140문단: Formation of the channels, winds and drops. Initially, five channels of the heart form simultaneously - the central, right and left channels as well as the Triple Circle of the east [front] and the Desirous One of the south [right]. After that, three channels form simultaneously - the Free of Knots channel that abides with [and behind] the central channel, the Household One of the west [back], and the Fiery One of the north [left]. These are called the eight channels that initially form at the heart [not to be confused with the eight channel-petals of the heart].
141문단: Then, the four channels of the cardinal directions [at the heart] split into two each - these being the four channel-petals of the intermediate directions. The continuations of the eight channel-petals of the heart split into three each, forming the twenty-four channels of the twenty-four places. Each of the twenty-four splits into three, making seventy-two. Each of these splits into a thousand, forming the seventy-two thousand channels in the body.
142문단: With respect to the formation of the winds, during the first month after connecting to the new life in the womb, coarse life-bearing winds are produced from the subtle life-bearing wind. At that time, the physical shape of the sentient being is like that of a fish.
143문단: In the second month, the downward-voiding wind is produced from the life-bearing wind; at that time, the body has five protuberances, like a turtle.
144문단: In the third month, the fire-dwelling wind is produced from the downward-voiding wind; at that time, the upper body is slightly bent and thus has the form of a wild boar.
145문단: In the fourth month, the upward-moving wind is produced from the fire-dwelling wind; at that time the upper body is slightly broad and thus has the form of a lion.
146문단: In the fifth month, the pervasive wind is produced from the upward-moving wind; at that time, the body is said to have the shape of a dwarf.
147문단: In the sixth month, the [secondary] wind that moves through the door of the eyes - called ‘moving’ - and the element earth are produced.
148문단: In the seventh month, the [secondary] wind that moves through the door of the ears - called ‘intensely moving’ - and the element water are produced.
149문단: In the eighth month, the [secondary] wind that moves through the door of the nose - called ‘thoroughly moving’ - and the element fire are produced.
150문단: In the ninth month, the [secondary] wind that moves through the door of the tongue - called ‘strongly moving’ - and the element wind are produced. In the tenth month, the [secondary] wind that moves through the door of the body - called ‘definitely moving’ - and the element of the space constituent are produced; at that time, the empty places in the body arise. The five secondary winds are mainly parts or states of the life bearing wind; they serve as aids in the apprehension of objects by the five sense consciousnesses. It is said that, although the ten winds form in the womb, [coarse] inhalation or exhalation from the nose does not occur until immediately after birth.
151문단: With respect to how the drops are formed, the mass which is a composite of the essences of the white and red constituents [drops] as well as the very subtle wind and mind, which is the size of a large white mustard seed, and which abides inside a slight empty place in the central channel at the heart, is called the ‘indestructible drop’ [in that it is indestructible until death].
152문단: From the white drop one part goes up inside the channel-wheel at the crown of the head and remains there; it is called ‘the letter ham’. It directly and indirectly increases the white drops in other parts of the body.
153문단: From the red drop at the heart, one part goes down inside the channel-wheel at the navel and abides there; it is called ‘the Fierce One’. It directly and indirectly increases the red constituent in other parts of the body.
154문단: Although a portion of each drop dwells in each channel-wheel, the one at the top of the head is the main source of increasing the white constituent; whereas the channel-wheel at the navel is the main source of increasing the red constituent. The channel-wheel at the heart is a source of equally increasing the white and red constituents.
155문단: Furthermore it is said that, whenever the white and red constituents are needed, they are produced and thus are not like water poured in a vessel [of which there is a certain quantity that is exhaustible].
156문단: This period from connecting to the new life in the place of conception, through to and including assuming a coarse body, is called the ‘basic Emanation Body’ [because of being the basis that is transformed into an Emanation Body through the practice of the path].
157문단: [As will be explained in the next chapter] these factors - from the intermediate being’s connecting to the new life in the womb, through to and including taking birth - are similar in aspect to the [practice of] bringing birth within the path as an Emanation Body in the practice of the stage of generation. They are also similar in aspect to the impure and pure illusory bodies of the stage of completion, during which either a coarse Emanation Body is assumed or one abides in the old physical aggregates, becoming an object of the ordinary eye. They are also the bases of purification by these ‘bringings to the path’.
158문단: There is no difference in the bases being purified by means of the stages of generation and completion [in Highest Yoga Mantra]. In the stage of generation, one takes basic death, intermediate state and birth as the bases of purification. As agents of purification one cultivates the three ‘bringings to the path’, as well as their branches. This means that, in accordance with the aspects of the stages of death, intermediate state and birth, one brings death to the path as the Truth Body, the intermediate state to the path as an Enjoyment Body and birth to the path as an Emanation Body. In the process of deity yoga, a yogi initially meditates on emptiness following the pattern of the eight signs of death, thereby bringing death to the path as a Buddha’s Truth Body. The yogi rises from this non-dual realization of emptiness in the form of a seed syllable (a syllable from which the entire form of a deity appears) or hand symbol, etc. - the wisdom consciousness itself serving as the basis of emanation. This is how the intermediate state is brought to the path as an Enjoyment Body. The subsequent appearance of the wisdom consciousness in the form of a deity’s body is the bringing of birth to the path as an Emanation Body. Emptiness and deity yogas patterned on the process of death, intermediate state and birth occur only in Highest Yoga Mantra, not in the three lower tantras - Action, Performance and Yoga. Thereby, indirectly, the three - ordinary death, intermediate state and birth - are purified, and one actualizes the Three Bodies that accord in aspect with them.
159문단: The stage of completion is the actual purifier of basic death, intermediate state and birth, through a path that accords in aspect with them.
The stage of completion is divided into six stages: 1 Isolation of body 2 Isolation of speech 3 Isolation of mind 4 Illusory body 5 Clear light 6 Union.
The isolation of body is a yoga in which one’s aggregates, constituents, sources and so forth are isolated from ordinary appearance and conception through being sealed with, or given the mark of, the bliss and emptiness of the stage of completion; they are thereby caused to appear as the sport of a deity. The isolation of speech is a yoga in which the very subtle wind that is the root of speech is isolated from the ordinary movement of wind, whereby wind and mantra are joined undifferentiably. The isolation of mind is a yoga in which the mind that is the root of cyclic existence and of nirvana is isolated from conceptuality as well as the wind that serves as the latter’s mount; this mind is caused to appear as an entity of undifferentiable bliss and emptiness. Through these three yogas, the four empties are induced, although only at the end of isolation of mind - the third stage - do they appear in complete form. Those [factors in the stage of completion] that accord in aspect with the clear light of death are the appearance, increase, near-attainment and clear light [that are manifested] in isolation of body, isolation of speech, isolation of mind, illusory body and union of a learner.
160문단: A non-learner’s union of clear light and pure illusory body is Buddhahood itself; those prior to it are of learner Bodhisattvas. Those [factors in the stage of completion] that accord in aspect with the intermediate state are the impure illusory body of the third stage [when the above six stages are condensed to five by taking the first two as one] and the pure illusory body of a learner’s union. Those [factors] that accord in aspect with birth are the abiding of the impure and pure illusory bodies in the old aggregates [the ordinary body] and their becoming objects of ordinary sight.


161문단: With respect to how the paths of the stage of completion directly purify birth, death and the intermediate state:


162문단: the very subtle mind - which is part of the undifferentiable entity of the very subtle wind and mind - [ordinarily] maintains a continuum of similar type from one to another, [finally] becoming the clear light of ordinary death. A yogi of the stage of completion stops this [process] through the power of meditative stabilization and transforms it into the metaphoric clear light [of isolation of mind] and the actual clear light. This is done with a path that accords in aspect with death. The yogi also transforms death into the clear light of the fruit - the Truth Body. This is how death is purified


163문단: With respect to the mode of purifying the intermediate state, the very subtle wind of that undifferentiable entity [ordinarily] maintains a continuum of similar type from one to the other and, acting as the mount of the ordinary clear light of death, rises as a body of an intermediate being. A yogi of the stage of completion stops this [process] through the power of meditative stabilization and transforms it into the impure and pure illusory bodies of a learner and of a non-learner that accord in aspect with the intermediate state. This is how the intermediate state is purified


164문단: With respect to the mode of purifying birth, when such an illusory body is achieved the intermediate state is ceased forever, and, through the power of that, rebirth in a womb through contaminated actions and afflictions is stopped. In place of this, an illusory body enters the old physical aggregates in a manner similar to an intermediate being’s taking birth in a mother’s womb, whereupon it makes the exertion of explaining doctrine [to others] and achieving the higher paths. This is how birth is purified


165문단: Thus, the root of actually stopping birth, death and intermediate state is just the metaphoric clear light [which is manifested] upon the completion of isolation of mind. The metaphoric clear light serves as the direct cause of an illusory body, and, through the power of its actually stopping death, the intermediate state as well as birth stop of their own accord


166문단: When an illusory body is achieved from such a metaphoric clear light, the intermediate state is stopped forever because the very subtle wind that would rise as a body of an intermediate being has become an illusory body


167문단: Once the intermediate state is totally stopped, there is no assumption of birth by the power of contaminated actions and afflictions. Thus, whoever attains an illusory body necessarily becomes fully enlightened in that same lifetime


168문단: Fearing that citation of the sources for what has been explained above would make the text too long, I have not given them. They can be known from the good explanations of the foremost Tsong-ka-pa, the father, and his spiritual sons [Gyel-tsap and Kay-drup] as well as the excellent scholars and adepts who follow them