On the Origin of the World
Prologue: In the Beginning (97, 24–98, 11)
Since everyone, both the gods of the world and people, says that nothing existed
before chaos, I shall prove they all are wrong, because they do not know the
[origin] of chaos or its root. Here [is the] proof.
Although certainly  people in general are [inclined] to say that chaos is
darkness, in actuality chaos comes from a shadow, and it is the shadow that has
been called darkness. The shadow comes from something that has existed from
the beginning, and so it is obvious that something in the beginning existed before
chaos came into being, and chaos came after what was in the beginning.
Let us consider the facts of the matter, and particularly what was in the
beginning, from which chaos came. In this way will the truth be clearly
demonstrated.
Narration: Origin of Sophia and the Powers of the World
(98, 11–99, 22)
After the world of the immortals was brought to completion out of the infinite, a
being with this likeness, called Sophia, flowed from Pistis. This being expressed
its wish that it come to resemble the first light, and at once its wish appeared as a
heavenly likeness with an incomprehensible greatness. This being came to be
between the immortals and what came after them, like what is above, and Sophia
served as a veil separating humanity from the things above.
The aeon of truth has no shadow <within> it because infinite light shines
everywhere within it. There is a shadow, however, outside it, and the shadow has
been called darkness. From the shadow appeared a power set over the darkness,
and the powers that came afterward called the shadow limitless chaos. From it
[every] sort of deity emerged, [one after] another, along with the whole world.
So [the shadow] came after  something that existed in the beginning, and
then it became visible. The abyss also came from Pistis, whom we have
mentioned.
The shadow sensed that there was one stronger than it. It was jealous, and
when it became pregnant by itself, all of a sudden it gave birth to envy. Since

then the principle of envy has appeared in all the aeons and their worlds. But
envy turned out to be an aborted fetus, without any spirit in it, and it came into
being as a shadow in an expanse of watery substance. Bitter wrath came into
being from the shadow and was cast into a region of chaos.
Since that day watery substance has been visible. What lurked in the shadow
flowed out and appeared in chaos. Just as all the afterbirth of a woman who
gives birth to a baby flows out, so also the matter that came into being from the
shadow was cast out. Matter did not come out of chaos; it was in chaos, in a
region of chaos.
The Appearance of Yaldabaoth (99, 23–100, 29)
After these things happened, Pistis came and appeared over chaotic matter,
which had been expelled like an aborted fetus, without any spirit in it. For chaos
is all limitless darkness and unfathomable water. When Pistis saw what came
into being from her deficiency, she was disturbed. And her disturbance appeared
as something frightful, and it fled to her in the chaos. She turned to it and [blew]
into its face in the abyss,  below all of the heavens.
When Pistis Sophia wanted to cause this thing with no spirit to be made into
a likeness of the divine and rule over matter and all its powers, for the first time
an archon appeared, out of the waters, lionlike in appearance, androgynous, with
great authority in himself but ignorant of where he came from.
When Pistis Sophia saw him moving in the depth of the waters, she said to
him, “Young man, move over here,” which is the meaning of Yaldabaoth.
Since then the faculty of speech has come to expression, and the faculty of
speech pertains to the gods, angels, and people. The gods, angels, and people
have brought to completion what has come into being by means of the word.
The ruler Yaldabaoth is ignorant of the power of Pistis. He did not see her
face, but in the water he saw the likeness that spoke to him, and from that voice
he called himself Yaldabaoth. Those who are perfect call him Ariael, because he
is like a lion.
After Yaldabaoth assumed authority over matter, Pistis Sophia withdrew up
to her light.
Yaldabaoth Creates Heaven and Earth and Produces Sons
(100, 29–101, 23)
When the ruler saw his greatness, he saw only himself and nothing else except
water and darkness. He thought that only he existed. His [thought] was

completed by means of the word, and it  appeared as a Spirit moving to and
fro over the waters. When the Spirit appeared, the ruler separated the watery
substance to one region and the dry substance to another region. From matter the
ruler created for himself a dwelling place and called it heaven, and from matter
he created a footstool and called it earth.
After this the ruler had a thought in accordance with his nature, and he
created an androgynous being by means of the word. He opened his mouth and
cooed to him. The child opened his eyes and saw his father, and he said to him,
“EE,” so his father called him Yao.
The ruler created a second son and cooed to him. The child opened his eyes
and said to his father, “EH,” so his father called him Eloai.
The ruler created a third son and cooed to him. The child opened his eyes
and said to his father, “AS,” so his father called him Astaphaios.
These are the three sons of their father.
The Seven Heavens of Chaos (101, 24–103, 2)
Seven androgynous beings appeared in chaos, and they have masculine names
and feminine names.
Yaldabaoth’s feminine name is forethought Sambathas, which
designates the week.
His son is called Yao, and his feminine name is mastery.
Sabaoth’s feminine name is divinity.
Adonaios’s feminine name is kingship.
Eloaios’s feminine name is envy.
Oraios’s feminine name is wealth.
Astaphaios’s feminine name  is Sophia.
These are the [seven] powers of the seven heavens of [chaos].
The powers were androgynous in accordance with the immortal pattern that
existed before them and the will of Pistis, so that the likeness of what was from
the beginning might have power to the end.
You will find the function of the masculine names and powers in the
Archangelic Book of Moses the Prophet. The feminine names are in the First
Book of Noraia.
Since the chief creator Yaldabaoth had great authorities at his disposal, he
created beautiful heavens, by means of the word, as dwelling places for each of

his sons, and in each heaven he created great glories, seven times glorious. Each
son has within his heaven thrones, mansions, temples, chariots, virgin spirits,
and their glories, extending up to an invisible realm, as well as armies of
divine, lordly, angelic, and archangelic powers, myriads without number, so they
might serve.
You will find a precise account of this in the First Discourse of Oraia.
Everything was completed in this <way> up to the sixth heaven, the heaven
of Sophia.
This heaven and earth were disrupted by the troublemaker who was beneath
them all. The six heavens shook, for the powers of chaos did not know who
had disturbed the heaven beneath them. When Pistis found out about the harm
caused by the troublemaker, she blew her breath, and she [bound him] and cast
him down to Tartaros.
[Since then] heaven and  earth have established themselves through
Sophia, who is the daughter of Yaldabaoth and is beneath them all.
Yaldabaoth Boasts That He Is God (103, 2–32)
After the heavens, their powers, and their entire government were established,
the chief creator exalted himself, and he was glorified by the whole army of
angels. All the gods and their angels praised and glorified him.
He was delighted. He boasted over and over again and said to them, “I don’t
need anything.”
He said, “I am God, and there is no other but me.”
When he said this, he sinned against all the immortals who speak forth, and
they watched him carefully.
When Pistis saw the impiety of the supreme ruler, she became angry.
Without being seen, she said, “You are wrong, Samael”—which means “blind
god.” “An enlightened, immortal human exists before you and will appear within
the forms you have shaped. The human will trample upon you as potter’s clay is
trampled, and you will descend with those who are yours to your mother the
abyss. And when your work comes to an end, all the deficiency that appeared
from truth will be dissolved. It will cease to be, and it will be like what never
was.”
After Pistis said this, she revealed the likeness of her greatness in the waters,
and then she withdrew up to her light.
Sabaoth Praises Pistis (103, 32–105, 20)

When Sabaoth son of Yaldabaoth heard the voice of Pistis, he sang songs of
praise to her, but he condemned his father [and mother]  on account of the
word of Pistis. He glorified her because she told them about the immortal human
and the light of the human. Pistis Sophia pointed her finger and poured over him
light from her light, as condemnation of his father. When Sabaoth was
enlightened, he received great authority over all of the powers of chaos, and
since then he has been called “lord of the powers.”
He hated his father, who is darkness, and his mother, who is the abyss. He
loathed his sister, who is the thought of the chief creator and who moves to and
fro over the waters.
All of the authorities of chaos were jealous of Sabaoth because of his light.
They were upset, and they waged a great war in the seven heavens.
When Pistis Sophia saw the war, she sent seven archangels to Sabaoth from
her light. The archangels carried him up to the seventh heaven and stood in his
presence as his attendants. Then she sent three more archangels to him and
established his kingdom above everyone, so that he might dwell above the
twelve gods of chaos.
When Sabaoth occupied the place of rest because of his repentance, Pistis
also gave him her daughter Zoe, with great authority, so that she might tell him
about everything in the eighth heaven. And since he had authority, he first made
himself a mansion. It is immense, magnificent, seven times as great as all the
mansions in the seven heavens.
In front of  his mansion he created a large throne on a chariot with four
faces, called cherubim. The cherubim throne has eight figures on each side of the
four corners, figures of lions, bulls, humans, and eagles, and there are a total of
sixty-four figures. Seven archangels stand before the throne. Sabaoth is the
eighth, and he has authority, and so there are seventy-two figures in all. From
this chariot the seventy-two gods took shape, so that they might rule over the
languages of the seventy-two nations. Beside that throne he created other,
serpentlike angels called seraphim, who glorify him unceasingly.
Sabaoth Creates a Congregation of Angels, Israel, and Jesus
(105, 20–106, 19)
Then he created a congregation of angels, thousands, myriads without number,
which was like the congregation in the eighth heaven. He also created a firstborn
called Israel—that is, “the person who sees God”—and he created another being
called Jesus Christ, who is like the Savior above in the eighth heaven and who
sits at the right of Sabaoth on a remarkable throne. At his left the virgin of the

holy Spirit sits upon a throne and glorifies him. Seven virgins stand before her,
with thirty harps and lyres and  trumpets in their hands, and they glorify
him. All the armies of angels glorify and praise him.
Sabaoth sits on a throne covered by a great light cloud. No one was with
him in the cloud except Sophia daughter of Pistis, and she taught him about all
the things in the eighth heaven, so that what resembles these things might be
created and his reign might last until the end of the heavens of chaos and their
powers.
Pistis Sophia moved him away from the darkness and summoned him to her
right, and she put the chief creator at her left. Since then right has been called
justice and left has been called injustice. They all received a realm in the
congregation of justice, and injustice is set over all their creations.
Yaldabaoth Produces Death (106, 19–107, 17)
When the chief creator of chaos saw his son Sabaoth and the glory in which he
dwells, and recognized that he was the greatest of all the authorities of chaos, he
was jealous of him. He was angry, and he engendered death from his own death.
Death was established over the sixth heaven, for Sabaoth had been carried away
from there. So the complete number of the six authorities of chaos was realized.
Since death was androgynous, he had sex with himself and produced seven
androgynous children. These are the names of the males: envy, wrath, tears,
sighs, grief, lament, tearful groans. These are the names of the females: anger,
pain, lust, sighs, curses, bitterness, strife. They had sex with each other, and each
one conceived seven children, so that the children total  forty-nine
androgynous demons.
You will find their names and functions in the Book of Solomon.
In the presence of these, Zoe, who dwells with Sabaoth, created seven good
androgynous powers. These are the names of the males: the one not jealous, the
blessed, the joyful, the true, the one not envious, the beloved, the faithful. These
are the names of the females: peace, gladness, joyfulness, blessedness, truth,
love, faith. Many good and pure spirits come from these powers.
You will find their accomplishments and functions in the Configurations of
the Fate of Heaven Beneath the Twelve.
Yaldabaoth Is Distressed About His Mistake
(107, 17–108, 5)
When the chief creator saw the reflection of Pistis in the waters, he was deeply

distressed, especially when he heard her voice, which was like the first voice that
called to him out of the waters. When he knew that she was the one who gave
him his name, he groaned. He was ashamed because of his transgression. And
when he knew for certain that an enlightened, immortal human existed before
him, he was greatly disturbed, because earlier he had said to all the gods and
their angels, “I am God; there is no other but me.” For he feared that they
might know another existed before him and condemn him.
But the chief creator was a fool. He had contempt for condemnation and
acted rashly, and he said, “If  anything existed before me, let it appear so
that we may see its light.”
And at once, look, light shone out of the eighth heaven above and passed
through all the heavens of the earth.
Adam of Light Shines Forth (108, 5–109, 1)
When the chief creator saw that the light was beautiful as it shone forth, he was
amazed and very much ashamed. The light appeared and a human likeness was
visible within it, and it was marvelous. No one saw it except the chief creator
and Forethought, who was with him. But its light was visible to all the powers
of the heavens, and so they all were disturbed by it.
When Forethought saw this messenger of light, she fell in love with him,
but he hated her because she was in darkness. She desired to mate with him, but
she was not able. When she was unable to satisfy her desire, she poured out her
light upon the earth.
Since then this messenger has been called Adam of light, which means “the
enlightened person of blood.” The earth upon <which the light of
Forethought> spread was called holy Adamas, which means “the holy
adamantine earth.”
From that time on all the authorities have honored the blood of the virgin,
and the earth was purified because of the blood of the virgin.
Further, the water was purified by the reflection of Pistis Sophia, who had
appeared to the chief creator in the waters. Rightly has it been said, “through the
waters.” Since the holy water gives life to all,  it purifies all.
Eros (109, 1–110, 1)
Out of this first blood Eros appeared. Eros is androgynous. His masculine side
is Himeros, because he is fire from the light, and his feminine side is a soul of
blood from the substance of Forethought. He is extremely handsome in

appearance, and more attractive than all the creatures of chaos.
When all the gods and their angels saw Eros, they fell in love with him. He
appeared within them all and made them burn with desire. Just as many lamps
are lit from a single lamp and all the light is the same but the light of the single
lamp is not diminished, so also Eros was dispersed in all the creatures of chaos
but was not diminished. Just as Eros appeared in the middle of light and
darkness, and the sexual intercourse of Eros was accomplished in the middle of
angels and people, so too the first sexual desire sprouted on the earth.
Woman followed the earth,
marriage followed woman,
birth followed marriage,
decay followed birth.
After Eros, a grapevine sprouted up from the blood that was shed upon the
earth, and so those who drink of the fruit of the vine are filled with sexual desire.
After the grapevine, a fig tree and a pomegranate tree sprouted up from the
earth, along with the rest of the trees, of every kind, and the seed of the trees
came from the  semen of the authorities and their angels.
The Creation of Paradise (110, 2–111, 8)
Then justice created paradise. Paradise is beautiful, and is outside the circuit of
the moon and the circuit of the sun in the land of pleasure, which is in the east in
the rocky region. Desire dwells in the middle of the beautiful, stately trees. The
tree of life eternal, as it appeared by the will of God, is in the north of paradise to
give immortality to the souls of holy people, who will leave their poor modeled
bodies at the end of the age. The tree of life looks like the sun, and its branches
are lovely. Its leaves are like the leaves of the cypress, its fruit is like a cluster of
white grapes, and its height reaches the sky.
Next to it is the tree of knowledge, which is endowed with the power of
God. It is glorious as the moon shining brightly, and its branches are lovely. Its
leaves are like fig leaves and its fruit is like a bunch of good, delicious dates.
The tree of knowledge is in the north of paradise to arouse the souls from
demonic stupor, so that they might come to the tree of life, eat its fruit, and
condemn the authorities and their angels.
The impact of this tree is described in the Holy Book:
You are the tree of knowledge,

which is in paradise,
from which the first man ate.
You opened his mind,
and he loved his female partner
and condemned  other strange figures,
and he loathed them.
After this the olive tree sprouted, and it was to purify kings and high priests
of justice who were to come in the last days. The olive tree appeared through the
light of the first Adam for the sake of the oil of anointing that kings and high
priests would receive.
The Creation of Plants, Animals, and Heavenly Bodies (111, 8–112, 25)
The first soul, Psyche, loved Eros, who was with her, and she poured her blood
upon him and upon the earth. From that blood the first rose sprouted upon the
earth, out of a thorn bush, to give joy to the light that would appear in the
bramble.
Next beautiful, fragrant flowers of every kind sprouted upon the earth from
the blood of each of the virgin daughters of Forethought. They fell in love with
Eros and poured their blood upon him and upon the earth.
Next, plants of every kind sprouted upon the earth, and they had the seed of
the authorities and their angels within them.
Then the authorities created animals, reptiles, and birds of every kind from
the waters, and they had the seed of the authorities and their angels within
them.
But before all this, when Adam of light appeared on the first day, he
remained upon the earth about two days. He left the lower Forethought in heaven
and ascended toward his light, and at once darkness covered the whole world.

When she wished, Sophia, who is in the lower heaven, received authority
from Pistis and created great heavenly lights and all the stars, and she placed
them in the sky to shine upon the earth and designate chronological signs,
seasons, years, months, days, nights, moments, and so on. Thus the whole region
of the sky was organized.
When Adam of light wished to enter his light, which is the eighth heaven, he
could not do so because of the poverty mingled with his light. So he created a
great aeon for himself, and in that eternal realm he created six more realms and
their worlds, which are six in number and seven times better than the heavens of

chaos and their worlds.
All these realms and their worlds are within the boundless region between
the eighth heaven and chaos below it, and they are considered part of the world
of poverty.
If you want to understand the organization of all these, you will find it
described in the Seventh Cosmos of Hieralias the Prophet.
The Creation of Humankind (112, 25–114, 4)
Before Adam of light made his return, the authorities saw him in chaos. They
laughed at the chief creator because he lied when he said, “I am God; no one
exists before me.”
When they came to the chief creator, they said, “Is this being not the God
who ruined our work?”
He answered and said, “Yes. If you do not want him to be able to ruin our
work, come, let’s create a human being out of earth in the image of our body and
with a likeness  to this being, to serve us, so that when this being sees his
likeness, he may fall in love with it. Then he will no longer ruin our work, and
we shall make the children of the light our slaves for this entire age.”
All this happened in accordance with Pistis’s forethought, so that humanity
might appear in this likeness and condemn the authorities because of their
modeled bodies. For their modeled bodies contained the light.
The authorities received knowledge they needed to create humanity. Sophia
Zoe, who is with Sabaoth, anticipated them. She laughed at their decision,
because they are blind, and they created humanity in ignorance and against their
own interests. They did not know what they were doing.
So she anticipated them. She created her own human being first, so that he
might tell the modeled bodies of the authorities how to despise them and how to
escape them.
The birth of the instructor happened like this. When Sophia let a drop of light
fall, it landed on the water, and at once there appeared an androgynous human
being. Sophia first made the drop into the form of a female body, and then she
took the body and gave it a shape like the Mother who had appeared. She
finished it in twelve months.
An androgynous human being was born, whom the Greeks call
Hermaphrodite. The Hebrews call the child’s mother Eve of life, which means
the female instructor of life, and the child born to her is lord. Later the
authorities  called the child the beast so that it might lead their modeled
bodies astray. The meaning of the beast is the instructor, for it turned out to be

the wisest of all creatures.
Song of Eve (114, 4–24)
Eve is the first virgin, and she gave birth to her first child without a man. She
was her own physician. For this reason she is said to have declared:
I am part of my mother, and I am the mother.
I am the wife, I am the virgin.
I am pregnant, I am the physician,
I am the comforter of birth pains.
My husband produced me, and I am his mother,
and he is my father and lord.
He is my strength,
he speaks of what he wants reasonably.
I am becoming,
but I have given birth to a lordly person.
This was revealed by the will of Sabaoth and his Christ to the souls who
were going to enter the modeled bodies of the authorities, about whom the holy
voice said, “Flourish and multiply, rule over all creatures.” These souls were
taken captive, in accordance with their destinies, by the chief creator, and they
were locked up in the prisons of the modeled bodies <…until> the end of the
age.
The Rulers of the World Mold Adam (114, 24–115, 30)
Then the chief creator voiced his opinion about humankind to those who were
with him. Then each of them ejaculated his semen into the middle of the navel of
the earth.
Since then the seven archons have formed humanity with a body resembling
their own body, but the likeness of humankind reflects the human being who
appeared to them. The modeled body came into being, part by part, from each of
the rulers, and the leader of the rulers created the brain and marrow.
Afterward the person appeared like the one before him. He became  a
person with soul, and he was called Adam, which means father, after the name of
the one who was before him.
After Adam was made, the chief creator abandoned him as a lifeless vessel,
since Adam was formed like an aborted fetus, with no spirit. When the chief

ruler recalled the word of Pistis, he was afraid that the true human might enter
his modeled body and rule over it. So he left his modeled body forty days
without soul, and he withdrew and left him.
On the fortieth day Sophia Zoe blew her breath into Adam, in whom there
was no soul. He began to crawl on the ground, but he could not stand up.
When the seven rulers came and saw him, they were greatly troubled. They
approached him and grabbed him, and the chief ruler said to the breath within
him, “Who are you? Where have you come from?”
He answered and said, “I have come through the power of the human to
destroy your work….”
When they heard this, they glorified him, because he gave them rest from
their fear and concern. They called that day the Day of Rest, because they
rested themselves from their troubles.
When they saw that Adam could not stand up, they were glad. They took him
and put him in paradise, and withdrew up to their heavens.
Eve Gives Adam Life (115, 30–116, 8)
After the day of rest, Sophia sent her daughter Zoe, called Eve, as an instructor
to raise Adam, in whom there was no soul, so that the children he would
engender might be vessels of light.
[When]  Eve saw her male partner on the ground, she felt sorry for him
and said, “Adam, live! Get up from the ground!”
At once her word became an accomplished deed. When Adam got up, at
once he opened his eyes, and he saw her and said, “You will be called the
Mother of the living, because you have given me life.”
The Powers Rape Earthly Eve (116, 8–117, 15)
The authorities were told that their modeled body was alive and had gotten up,
and they were greatly troubled. They sent seven archangels to see what had
happened.
They came to Adam, and when they saw Eve speaking with him, they said to
each other, “Who is this enlightened woman? She looks like what appeared to us
in the light. Come, let’s seize her and ejaculate our semen into her, so that she
may be unclean and unable to ascend to her light, and her children will serve us.
But let’s not tell Adam, because he is not one of us. Instead, let’s put him to
sleep and suggest to him in his sleep that Eve came from his rib, so that the
woman may serve and he may rule over her.”

Since Eve was a heavenly power, she laughed at what they had in mind. She
blinded their eyes and secretly left something that resembled her with Adam.
She entered the tree of knowledge and stayed there. The rulers chased her,
and she revealed to them that she had entered the tree and had become a tree.
The blind powers fell into great fear and ran away.
Later, when they recovered their sight, they came to [Adam]. They saw a
female like that woman  with him, and they were troubled and thought this
was the true Eve. They acted rashly. They came to her, seized her, and ejaculated
their semen upon her.
The powers acted wickedly. They defiled her in ways natural and obscene.
First they defiled the seal of her voice, which had said to them, “What exists
before you?” In this way they meant also to defile those who say that they were
born at the end of the age through the word, through the true human.
The authorities and their angels erred. They did not know they defiled their
own body and likeness in all these ways.
Eve Bears the Children of the Powers (117, 15–118, 6)
She first became pregnant with Abel from the first ruler, and then she gave birth
to her other children from the seven authorities and their angels.
All this happened in accordance with the chief creator’s forethought, so that
the first mother might bear within herself every seed, every one mixed and
joined with the fate of the world and its configurations, and justice.
A plan for Eve emerged, that the modeled bodies of the authorities might
contain the light. Then the light would condemn the authorities through their
own modeled bodies.
The first Adam of light is spiritual and appeared on the first day. The second
Adam is psychical and appeared on the sixth day, called Aphrodite. The third
Adam is earthly, a person of law, who appeared on the eighth day, called Sunday,
[after]  the poor Day of Rest.
The offspring of earthly Adam multiplied and filled the earth, and they
acquired all the technical skills psychical Adam had. But they all were in
ignorance.
The Trees of Paradise and the Beast (118, 6–119, 19)
Let me continue.
When the rulers saw him and the woman with him in error and ignorance,
like animals, they were very pleased.

Then they found out that the immortal human was not going to pass them by
and they would even have to fear the woman who turned into a tree. They were
troubled and said, “Could this be the one who blinded us and taught us about the
defiled woman who resembles the true human, in order to overpower us?”
The seven hatched a plot. They approached Adam and Eve carefully and said
to him, “You may eat the fruit of every tree created for you in paradise, but be
careful not to eat from the tree of knowledge. If you eat, you will die.” They
gave them a great fright and withdrew up to their authorities.
The beast, the wisest of all creatures, came by. When it saw the likeness of
their mother, Eve, it said to her, “What did God say to you? ‘Do not eat from the
tree of knowledge’?”
She said, “He not only said, ‘Do not eat from it,’ but ‘Do not touch it, or you
will die.’”
The beast said to her, “Don’t be afraid. You certainly will [not die. He
knows] that when you eat  from it your minds will become sober and you
will be like gods, knowing the difference between evil and good people. He said
this to you because he is jealous, so that you would not eat from it.”
Eve believed the words of the instructor. She looked at the tree and saw it
was beautiful and appealing, and she liked it. She took some of its fruit and ate,
and she gave it to her husband too, and he also ate. Their minds opened.
When they had eaten,
the light of knowledge shone on them.
When they clothed themselves with shame,
they knew they were stripped of knowledge.
When they became sober,
they saw they were naked
and they fell in love.
When they saw their makers looked like beasts,
they loathed them.
They understood a great deal.
The Rulers Confront Adam and Eve
(119, 19–121, 27)
When the rulers realized that Adam and Eve had broken their commandment,
they entered paradise and came to Adam and Eve with an earthquake and a great
threat, in order to see what happened as a result of the help that was given. Adam

and Eve were very much disturbed, and they hid in the trees in paradise. The
rulers did not know where they were, and they said, “Adam, where are you?”
He said, “I’m here. I was ashamed and hid because I was afraid of you.”
They said to him, ignorantly, “Who told you about the shame with which you
clothed yourselves? Unless you ate from the tree!”
He said, “The woman you gave me gave it to me, and I ate.”
They [said] to the woman,  “What have you done?”
She answered and said, “The instructor urged me to eat, and I ate.”
The rulers approached the instructor. Their eyes were blinded by it, and they
could not do anything to it. They were powerless, and they cursed it. Then they
came to the woman, and they cursed her and her children. After the woman they
cursed Adam and the earth and the fruit because of him. Everything they created
they cursed. There is no blessing from them. Good cannot come from evil.
Since then the authorities have known for certain that there is something
stronger than they. They simply recognized that their commandment was broken.
Great envy came into the world just because of the immortal human.
When the rulers saw that their Adam had acquired different knowledge, they
wanted to test him. They gathered all the domestic animals, wild beasts of the
earth, and the birds of the sky, and brought them to Adam to see what he would
call them. When he saw them, he gave names to the creatures of the rulers.
The rulers were troubled that Adam had recovered from all his anguish.
They gathered together and made a plan, and said, “Look, Adam has become
like one of us, and he knows the difference between light and darkness. Now
perhaps he will go astray as he did with the tree of knowledge and will come to
the tree of life, eat from it, and become immortal and [rule] and despise us and
consider [us] and all our glory to be foolish. And he will denounce [us and our]
world. Come, let’s throw him  out of paradise down to the earth, where he
came from, so that he no longer can know anything better than we can.”
So they threw Adam and his wife out of paradise.
What they had done did not satisfy them. They were still afraid. So they went
to the tree of life and set great dreadful things around it, fiery living creatures
called cherubim, and among them they put a flaming sword, constantly turning
in a terrifying way, so that no one from the earth might ever enter that place.
After this, since the rulers were jealous of Adam, they wanted to shorten the
human life span, but they could not do so because of fate, which was established
from the beginning. To each human being there was assigned a life span of one
thousand years according to the circuit of the heavenly luminaries. Though the
rulers were not able to do this, each one of the evildoers subtracted ten years, so
the remaining time comes to nine hundred thirty years, and these are spent in

grief and weakness and evil distractions. This is how life has gone, from that day
until the end of the age.
Phoenixes, Water Serpents, and Bulls of Egypt (121, 27–123, 2)
When Sophia Zoe saw that the archons of darkness cursed her friends who were
like her, she was angry. She came from the first heaven with all her power and
chased the rulers from [their] heavens, and she cast them down into the sinful
world so that they might dwell there as evil demons upon the earth.
[She sent a bird]  that was in paradise so that, until the end of the age, it
might spend a thousand years in the rulers’ world. The bird, a living creature
endowed with soul, is called the phoenix, and it kills itself and revives itself as
an image of the judgment against the rulers, because they dealt unjustly with
Adam and his generation, until the end of the age.
There are three human beings and their descendants in the world until the
end of the age: the spiritual, the psychical, and the earthly. This circumstance is
like the three kinds of phoenixes of paradise: the first is immortal, the second
lives a thousand years, and the third is consumed, according to what is written in
the Holy Book. Likewise, there are three baptisms: the first is spiritual, the
second is by fire, the third is by water.
As the image of the phoenix appears with reference to the angels, so the
water serpents in Egypt indicate those who go down for the baptism of a true
human being.
The two bulls in Egypt indicate a mystery, the sun and the moon, which
represent Sabaoth, because Sophia of the world has been exalted above the sun
and the moon from the time when she created them and sealed her heaven until
the end of the age.
The worm that is born from the phoenix also represents humanity. It is
written of it, “The just will sprout like a phoenix.” The phoenix first appears
alive, then dies, and then rises again, as an image of what appears at the end of
the age.
These great images have [appeared] only in Egypt, not in other lands,
indicating  that Egypt is like God’s paradise.
Proof: The World Is in Error and Ignorance (123, 2–31)
Let us return to the rulers of whom we spoke, so that we may offer an
explanation of them.
When the seven rulers were cast from their heavens down to the earth, they

created for themselves angels, numerous and demonic, to serve them. These
angels taught people much about error, magic, potions, idolatry, bloodshed,
altars, temples, sacrifices, and libations to all the demons of the earth. The angels
work with fate, which came into being by agreement of the gods of injustice
and justice.
So when the world came into being, it went about in error and confusion all
the time. All people on earth served the demons from the creation until the end
of the age—both the angels of justice and the people of injustice. Thus the world
was in confusion, ignorance, and stupor. All erred, until the appearance of the
true human.
Enough on this. Next we shall consider our world so that we may present an
accurate description of its structure and administration.
Then it will be clear how the proof of hidden things, which have been
apparent from the foundation of the world to the end of the age, came about.
Epilogue: The Blessed Little Innocent Spirits and the Church
(123, 31–125, 14)
Now I come to the main points [about] immortal humanity. I shall discuss all the
beings belonging to immortal humanity and explain how they got here.
When a multitude of people had come into being through [Adam, who]
was formed from matter, and the world was filled, the rulers reigned over it—
that is, they kept it in ignorance.
What is the reason? It is this. The immortal Father knows that deficiency of
truth came to be among the aeons and their world. So when he wanted to bring
down the rulers of perdition by means of their modeled creatures, he sent the
blessed little innocent spirits, who are like you, down to the world of perdition.
They are not strangers to knowledge.
All knowledge is in one angel who appears to them. This angel stands before
the Father and is not incapable of giving them knowledge.
Whenever they appear in the world of perdition, the blessed spirits
immediately reveal the pattern of incorruptibility so as to condemn the rulers and
their powers.
When the blessed spirits appeared in the modeled bodies of the authorities,
the authorities were jealous of them. Out of envy the authorities mixed their
semen with them in order to defile them, but they were not able.
When the blessed spirits appeared in an enlightened form, they appeared in
different ways. They came from different realms and revealed their knowledge to
the church that appeared in the modeled bodies of perdition. The church was

found to have all kinds of seed because of the seed of the authorities mixed [with
it].
Then the Savior made all of them [one]. The spirits of these people [proved
to be] superior, being blessed  but varying in election. There are many
others who are kingless and superior to everyone before them.
So there are four generations. Three generations belong to the kings of the
eighth heaven, and the fourth generation, which is the most exalted, is kingless
and perfect.
These people will enter the holy place of their Father, and they will reside in
rest, and eternal, ineffable glory, and ceaseless joy. They already are kings. They
are the immortal within the mortal, and they will condemn the gods of chaos and
their powers.
Jesus the Word (125, 14–32)
The Word who is above all was sent for one reason only, to announce what is
unknown. He said, “There is nothing hidden that is not apparent, and what has
not been known will be known.”
These people were sent to reveal what is hidden and expose the seven
authorities of chaos and their godlessness, and so they were condemned to
death.
When all those who are perfect appeared in the modeled bodies of the rulers
and revealed matchless truth, they put to shame all the wisdom of the gods.
Their fate was condemnation,
their power was dried up,
their dominion was dissolved,
their forethought was [empty],
as was their glory.
The End of the Age (125, 32–126, 35)
Before the end [of the age], this whole region will shake with loud thunder. The
archons will lament because of their [fear of]  death, the angels will grieve
for their human beings, the demons will weep over their times and seasons, and
their people will mourn and cry on account of their death.
Then the age will come, and they will be disturbed. Their kings will be drunk
from the flaming sword and will wage war against each other, so that the earth
will be drunk from the blood that is poured out. The seas will be troubled by war.

The sun will darken and the moon will lose its light. The stars of the sky will
abandon their circuits, and loud thunder will roar from a great power, above all
the powers of chaos, where the firmament of the female is located. She had
produced the first creation, and now she will put away her wise fire of
afterthought and put on irrational wrath.
Pistis Sophia will drive out the gods of chaos, whom she had created along
with the chief creator, and she will cast them down to the abyss. They will be
wiped out through their own injustice. They will be like mountains blazing with
fire, and they will consume one another until they are destroyed by their chief
creator. When he destroys them, he will turn on himself and attack himself until
he is no more.
The heavens of the gods of chaos will collapse upon one another and their
powers will be consumed. Their realms will also be overthrown. The chief
creator’s heaven will fall and split in half. His [stars in their sphere] will fall
down to the earth, [and the earth will not] be able to endure them. They will fall
[down] to the abyss, and the abyss will be overthrown.
Light Overcomes Darkness (126, 35–127, 17)
The light will [overcome the] darkness and banish it. The darkness will be like
 something that never was, and the source of darkness will be dissolved.
Deficiency will be pulled out by its root and cast down into the darkness, and the
light will withdraw up to its root.
The glory of the unbegotten will appear and fill all the eternal realms when
the prophets and the writings of rulers are revealed and fulfilled by those who
are called perfect. Those who have not become perfect in the unbegotten Father
will receive glory in their realms and the kingdoms of immortals, but they will
never enter the kingless realm.
All must return to the place where they came from. By what they do and
what they know all of them will reveal their natures.
