The Gospel of Thomas

Prologue
These are the hidden sayings that the living Jesus spoke and Judas
Thomas the Twin
 recorded.
1
And he
 said, “Whoever discovers the interpretation of these
sayings will not taste death.”
2
(1) Jesus said,
 “Let one who seeks not stop seeking until one
finds. (2) When one finds, one will be troubled. (3) When one is
troubled, one will marvel (4) and will reign over all.”
3
(1) Jesus said, “If your leaders say to you, ‘Look, the kingdom is in
heaven,’ then the birds of heaven will precede you. (2) If they say
to you, ‘It is in the sea,’
 then the fish will precede you. (3) Rather,
the kingdom is inside you and it is outside you.

(4) “When you know yourselves, then you will be known,

and you will understand that you are children of the living Father.
(5) But if you do not know yourselves, then you dwell in poverty,
and you are poverty.”
4
(1) Jesus said, “The person old in days will not hesitate to ask a
little child seven days old
 about the place of life, and that person
will live.
 (2) For many of the first will be last
 (3) and will
become a single one.”
5
(1) Jesus said, “Know what is in front of your face, and what is
hidden from you will be disclosed to you.
 (2) For there is nothing
hidden that will not be revealed.”
6
(1) His disciples asked him and said to him, “Do you want us to
fast? How should we pray? Should we give to charity? What diet
should we observe?”

(2) Jesus said, “Do not lie, (3) and do not do what you hate,
(4) because all things are disclosed before heaven.
 (5) For there is
nothing hidden that will not be revealed, (6) and there is nothing
covered that will remain undisclosed.”
7
(1) Jesus said, “Blessed is the lion that the human will eat, so that
the lion becomes human. (2) And cursed
 is the human that the
lion will eat, and the lion will become human.”
8
(1) And he said, “Humankind
 is like a wise fisherman who cast
his net into the sea and drew it up from the sea full of little fish. (2)
Among them the wise fisherman discovered a fine large fish. (3)
He threw all the little fish back

 into the sea and with no
difficulty chose the large fish. (4) Whoever has ears to hear should
hear.”
9
(1) Jesus said, “Look, the sower went out, took a handful of seeds,
and scattered them. (2) Some fell on the road, and the birds came
and pecked them up. (3) Others fell on rock, and they did not take
root in the soil and did not produce heads of grain. (4) Others fell
on thorns, and they choked the seeds and worms devoured them.
(5) And others fell on good soil, and it brought forth a good crop.
It yielded sixty per measure and one hundred twenty per
measure.”
10
Jesus said, “I have thrown fire upon the world, and look, I am
watching it until it blazes.”
11
(1) Jesus said, “This heaven will pass away, and the one above it
will pass away.

(2) “The dead are not alive, and the living will not die.

(3) “During the days when you ate what is dead, you made it
alive. When you are in the light, what will you do?

(4) “On the day when you were one, you became two. But
when you become two, what will you do?”
12
(1) The disciples said to Jesus, “We know that you are going to
leave us. Who will be our leader?”

(2) Jesus said to them, “No matter where you have come from,
you are to go to James the Just, for whose sake heaven and earth
came into being.”
13
(1) Jesus said to his disciples, “Compare me to something and tell
me what I am like.”

(2) Simon Peter said to him, “You are like a just messenger.”

(3) Matthew said to him,

 “You are like a wise
philosopher.”

(4) Thomas said to him, “Teacher, my mouth is utterly unable
to say what you are like.”

(5) Jesus said, “I am not your teacher. Because you have drunk,
you have become intoxicated from the bubbling spring that I have
tended.”

(6) And he took him, and withdrew, and spoke three sayings
to him.

(7) When Thomas came back to his friends, they asked him,
“What did Jesus say to you?”

(8) Thomas said to them, “If I tell you one of the sayings he
spoke to me, you will pick up rocks and stone me, and fire will
come from the rocks and consume you.”
14
(1) Jesus said to them, “If you fast, you will bring sin upon
yourselves, (2) and if you pray, you will be condemned, (3) and if
you give to charity, you will harm your spirits.

(4) “When you go into any region and walk through the
countryside,
 when people receive you, eat what they serve you
and heal the sick among them.
 (5) For what goes into your mouth
will not defile you; rather, it is what comes out of your mouth that
will defile you.”
15
Jesus said, “When you see one who was not born of woman, fall
on your faces and worship. That is your father.”
16
(1) Jesus said, “Perhaps people think that I have come to impose
peace upon the world. (2) They do not know that I have come to
impose conflicts upon the earth: fire, sword, war. (3) For there will
be five

 in a house: there will be three against two and two
against three, father against son and son against father, (4) and they
will stand alone.”
17
Jesus said, “I shall give you what no eye has seen, what no ear has
heard, what no hand has touched, what has not arisen in the human
heart.”
18
(1) The disciples said to Jesus, “Tell us how our end will be.”

(2) Jesus said, “Have you discovered the beginning, then, so
that you are seeking the end? For where the beginning is the end
will be. (3) Blessed is one who stands at the beginning: that one
will know the end and will not taste death.”
19
(1) Jesus said, “Blessed is one who came into being before coming
into being.

(2) “If you become my disciples and listen to my sayings, these
stones will serve you.

(3) “For there are five trees in paradise for you; they do not
change, summer or winter, and their leaves do not fall. (4)
Whoever knows them will not taste death.”
20
(1) The disciples said to Jesus, “Tell us what heaven’s kingdom is
like.”

(2) He said to them, “It is like a mustard seed. (3) <It>
 is the
smallest of all seeds, (4) but when it falls on prepared soil, it
produces a large plant and becomes a shelter for birds of
heaven.”
21
(1) Mary said to Jesus, “What are your disciples like?”

(2) He said, “They are like

 children living in a field that is
not theirs.
 (3) When the owners of the field come, they will say,
‘Give our field back to us.’ (4) They take off their clothes in front
of them in order to give it back to them, and they return their field
to them.

(5) “For this reason I say, if the owner of a house knows that a
thief is coming, he will be on guard before the thief arrives and
will not let the thief break into the house of his estate and steal his
possessions.
 (6) As for you, then, be on guard against the world.
(7) Arm yourselves with great strength, or the robbers might find a
way to get to you, (8) for the trouble you expect will come.
 (9)
Let there be among you a person who understands.

(10) “When the crop ripened, the person came quickly with
sickle in hand and harvested it.
 (11) Whoever has ears to hear
should hear.”
22
(1) Jesus saw some babies nursing. (2) He said to his disciples,
“These nursing babies are like those who enter the kingdom.”

(3) They said to him, “Then shall we enter the kingdom as
babies?”

(4) Jesus said to them, “When you make the two into one, and
when you make the inner like the outer and the outer like the inner,
and the
upper like the lower, (5) and when you make male and
female into a single one, so that the male will not be male nor the
female be female, (6) when you make eyes in place of an eye, a
hand in place of a hand, a foot in place of a foot, an image in place
of an image, (7) then you will enter [the kingdom].”

23
Jesus said, “I shall choose you, one from a thousand and two from
ten thousand, and they will stand as a single one.”
24
(1) His disciples said, “Show us the place where you are, for we
must seek it.”

(2) He said to them, “Whoever has ears should hear. (3) There
is light within a person of light, and it
 shines on the whole world.
If it does not shine, it is dark.”
25
(1) Jesus said, “Love your sibling like your soul;
 (2) protect that
person like the pupil of your eye.”
26
(1) Jesus said, “You see the speck that is in your sibling’s eye, but
you do not see the beam that is in your own eye. (2) When you
take the beam out of your own eye, then you will see clearly to
take the speck out of your sibling’s eye.
27
(1) “If you do not fast from the world, you will not find the
kingdom. (2) If you do not observe the Sabbath as a Sabbath, you
will not see the Father.”
28
(1) Jesus said, “I took my stand in the midst of the world, and in
flesh I appeared to them.
 (2) I found them all drunk, and I did not
find any of them thirsty. (3) My soul ached for the children of
humanity,
 because they are blind in their hearts and do not see,
for they came into the world empty, and they also seek to depart
from the world empty. (4) But now they are drunk. When they
shake off their wine, then they will repent.”
29
(1) Jesus said, “If the flesh came into being because of spirit, it is a
marvel, (2) but if spirit came into being because of the body, it is a
marvel of marvels. (3) Yet I marvel

 at how this great wealth
has come to dwell in this poverty.”
30
(1) Jesus said, “Where there are three deities, they are divine. (2)
Where there are two or one, I am with that one.”
31
(1) Jesus said, “A prophet is not acceptable in the prophet’s own
town; (2) a doctor does not heal those who know the doctor.”
32
Jesus said, “A city built upon a high hill and fortified cannot fall,
nor can it be hidden.”
33
(1) Jesus said, “What you will hear in your ear, in the other ear
proclaim from your rooftops. (2) For no one lights a lamp and puts
it under a basket, nor does one put it in a hidden place. (3) Rather,
one puts it on a stand so that all who come and go will see its
light.”
34
Jesus said, “If a blind person leads a blind person, both of them
will fall into a hole.”
35
(1) Jesus said, “You cannot enter the house of the strong and take it
by force without tying the person’s hands. (2) Then you can loot
the person’s house.”
36
Jesus said, “Do not worry, from morning to evening and from
evening to morning, about what you will wear.”
37
(1) His disciples said, “When will you appear to us and when shall
we see you?”

(2) Jesus said, “When you strip without being ashamed and
you take your clothes and put them under your feet like little
children and trample them, (3) then [you] will see

 the child of
the living one and you will not be afraid.”
38
(1) Jesus said, “Often you have desired to hear these sayings that I
am speaking to you, and you have no one else from whom to hear
them. (2) There will be days when you will seek me and you will
not find me.”
39
(1) Jesus said, “The Pharisees and the scholars have taken
 the
keys of knowledge
 and have hidden them. (2) They have not
entered, nor have they allowed those who want to enter to do so.
(3) As for you, be as shrewd as snakes and as innocent as doves.”
40
(1) Jesus said, “A grapevine has been planted away from the
Father. (2) Since it is not strong, it will be pulled up by its root and
will perish.”
41
(1) Jesus said, “Whoever has something in hand will be given
more, (2) and whoever has nothing will be deprived of even the
little that person has.”
42
Jesus said, “Be passersby.”
43
(1) His disciples said to him, “Who are you to say these things to
us?”

(2) “You do not know who I am from what I say to you.
 (3)
Rather, you have become like the Jewish people, for they love the
tree but hate its fruit, or they love the fruit but hate the tree.”
44
(1) Jesus said, “Whoever blasphemes against the Father will be
forgiven, (2) and whoever blasphemes against the Son will be
forgiven, (3) but whoever blasphemes against the holy Spirit will
not be forgiven, either on earth or in heaven.”
45
(1) Jesus said, “Grapes are not harvested from thornbushes, nor are
figs gathered from thistles, for they yield no fruit. (2) A good
person brings forth

 good from the storehouse; (3) a bad
person brings forth evil things from the corrupt storehouse in the
heart and says evil things. (4) For from the abundance of the heart
this person brings forth evil things.”
46
(1) Jesus said, “From Adam to John the Baptizer, among those
born of women, there is no one greater than John the Baptizer, so
that his eyes
 should not be averted.
 (2) But I have said that
whoever among you becomes a child will know the kingdom and
will become greater than John.”
47
(1) Jesus said, “A person cannot mount two horses or bend two
bows. (2) And a servant cannot serve two masters, or that servant
will honor the one and offend the other.
 (3) No person drinks
aged wine and immediately desires to drink new wine. (4) New
wine is not poured into aged wineskins, or they might break, and
aged wine is not poured into a new wineskin, or it might spoil.
(5) An old patch is not sewn onto a new garment, for there would
be a tear.”
48
Jesus said, “If two make peace with each other in a single house,
they will say to the mountain, ‘Move from here,’ and it will
move.”
49
(1) Jesus said, “Blessed are those who are alone
 and chosen, for
you will find the kingdom. (2) For you have come from it, and you
will return there again.”
50
(1) Jesus said, “If they say to you, ‘Where have you come from?’
say to them, ‘We have come from the light, from the place where
the light came into being by itself, established [itself],

 and
appeared in their image.’ (2) If they say to you, ‘Is it you?’
 say,
‘We are its children, and we are the chosen of the living Father.’
(3) If they ask you, ‘What is the evidence of your Father in you?’
say to them, ‘It is motion and rest.’”
51
(1) His disciples said to him, “When will the rest
 for the dead
take place, and when will the new world come?”

(2) He said to them, “What you look for has come, but you do
not know it.”
52
(1) His disciples said to him, “Twenty-four prophets
 have spoken
in Israel, and they all spoke of you.”

(2) He said to them, “You have disregarded the living one who
is in your presence and have spoken of the dead.”
53
(1) His disciples said to him, “Is circumcision useful or not?”

(2) He said to them, “If it were useful, children’s fathers would
produce them already circumcised from their mothers. (3) Rather,
the true circumcision in spirit has become valuable in every
respect.”
54
Jesus said, “Blessed are the poor, for yours is heaven’s
kingdom.”
55
(1) Jesus said, “Whoever does not hate father and mother cannot
be a disciple of me, (2) and whoever does not hate brothers and
sisters and bear the cross as I do will not be worthy of me.”
56
(1) Jesus said, “Whoever has come to know the world has
discovered a carcass, (2) and whoever has discovered a carcass, of
that person the world is not worthy.”
57
(1) Jesus said, “The Father’s kingdom is like a person who had
[good] seed. (2) His enemy came at night

 and sowed weeds
among the good seed. (3) The person did not let them pull up the
weeds, but said to them, ‘No, or you might go to pull up the weeds
and pull up the wheat along with them.’ (4) For on the day of the
harvest the weeds will be conspicuous and will be pulled up and
burned.”
58
Jesus said, “Blessed is the person who has labored
 and has found
life.”
59
Jesus said, “Look to the living one as long as you live, or you
might die and then try to see the living one, and you will be unable
to see.”
60
(1) <He saw>
 a Samaritan carrying a lamb as he
 was going to
Judea.

(2) He said to his disciples, “That person is carrying the lamb
around.”

(3) They said to him, “Then he may kill it and eat it.”

(4) He said to them, “He will not eat it while it is alive, but
only after he has killed it and it has become a carcass.”

(5) They said, “Otherwise he cannot do it.”

(6) He said to them, “So also with you, seek for yourselves a
place for rest, or you might become a carcass and be eaten.”
61
(1) Jesus said, “Two will rest on a couch; one will die, one will
live.”

(2) Salome said, “Who are you, mister? You have climbed onto
my couch
 and eaten from my table as if you are from
someone.”

(3) Jesus said to her, “I am the one who comes from what is
whole. I was given from the things of my Father.”

(4) “I am your disciple.”

(5) “For this reason I say, if one is <whole>,
 one will be
filled with light,
 but if one is divided, one will be filled with
darkness.”
62
(1) Jesus said, “I disclose my mysteries to those [who are worthy]
of

 [my] mysteries.
 (2) Do not let your left hand know what
your right hand is doing.”
63
(1) Jesus said, “There was a rich person who had a great deal of
money. (2) He said, ‘I shall invest my money so that I may sow,
reap, plant, and fill my storehouses with produce, that I may lack
nothing.’ (3) These were the things he was thinking in his heart,
but that very night he died. (4) Whoever has ears should hear.”
64
(1) Jesus said, “A person was receiving guests. When he had
prepared the dinner, he sent his servant to invite the guests.

(2) “The servant went to the first and said to that one, ‘My
master invites you.’

(3) “That person said, ‘Some merchants owe me money; they
are coming to me tonight. I must go and give them instructions.
Please excuse me from dinner.’

(4) “The servant went to another and said to that one, ‘My
master has invited you.’

(5) “That person said to the servant, ‘I have bought a house and
I have been called away for a day. I shall have no time.’

(6) “The servant went to another and said to that one, ‘My
master invites you.’

(7) “That person said to the servant, ‘My friend is to be
married and I am to arrange the banquet. I shall not be able to
come. Please excuse me from dinner.’

(8) “The servant went to another and said to that one, ‘My
master invites you.’

(9) “That person said to the servant, ‘I have bought an estate
and I am going to collect the rent. I shall not be able to come.
Please excuse me.’

(10) “The servant returned and said to his master, ‘The people
whom you invited to dinner have asked to be excused.’

(11) “The master said to his servant, ‘Go out on the streets and
bring back whomever you find to have dinner.’

(12) “Buyers and merchants [will] not enter the places of my
Father.”


65
(1) He said, “A [usurer]
 owned a vineyard and rented it to some
farmers, so that they might work it and he might collect its produce
from them. (2) He sent his servant so that the farmers might give
the servant the produce of the vineyard. (3) They seized, beat, and
almost killed his servant, and the servant returned and told his
master. (4) His master said, ‘Perhaps he did not know them.’
 (5)
He sent another servant, and the farmers beat that one as well. (6)
Then the master sent his son and said, ‘Perhaps they will show my
son some respect.’ (7) Since the farmers knew that he was the heir
to the vineyard, they seized him and killed him. (8) Whoever has
ears should hear.”
66
Jesus said, “Show me the stone that the builders rejected: that is
the cornerstone.”
67
Jesus said, “One who knows everything but lacks in oneself lacks
everything.”
68
(1) Jesus said, “Blessed are you when you are hated and
persecuted, (2) and no place will be found, wherever you have
been persecuted.”
69
(1) Jesus said, “Blessed are they who have been persecuted in their
hearts: they are the ones who have truly come to know the
Father.
 (2) Blessed are they who are hungry, that the stomach of
the person in want may be filled.”
70
(1) Jesus said, “If you bring forth what is within you, what you
have will save you. (2) If you do not have that within you, what
you do not have within you [will] kill you.”
71
Jesus said, “I shall destroy [this] house, and no one will be able to
build it [again].”


72
(1) A [person said] to him, “Tell my brothers to divide my father’s
possessions with me.”

(2) He said to the person, “Mister, who made me a divider?”

(3) He turned to his disciples and said to them, “I am not a
divider, am I?”
73
Jesus said, “The harvest is large but the workers are few. So beg
the master
 to send out workers to the harvest.”
74
Someone said,
 “Master,
 there are many around the drinking
trough, but there is nothing
 in the <well>.”
75
Jesus said, “There are many standing at the door, but those who are
alone
 will enter the wedding chamber.”
76
(1) Jesus said, “The Father’s kingdom is like a merchant who had a
supply of merchandise and then found a pearl. (2) That merchant
was prudent; he sold the merchandise and bought the single pearl
for himself.
 (3) So also with you, seek his treasure that is
unfailing, that is enduring, where no moth comes to devour and no
worm destroys.”
77
(1) Jesus said, “I am the light that is over all things.
 I am all:
from me all has come forth, and to me all has reached.
 (2) Split a
piece of wood; I am there. (3) Lift up the stone, and you will find
me there.”
78
(1) Jesus said, “Why have you come out to the countryside? To see
a reed shaken by the wind?(2) And to see a person dressed in soft
clothes, [like your] rulers and your

 powerful ones? (3) They
are dressed in soft clothes, and they cannot understand truth.”
79
(1) A woman in the crowd said to him, “Blessed is the womb that
bore you and the breasts that fed you.”

(2) He said to [her], “Blessed are they who have heard the
word of the Father and have truly kept it.
 (3) For there will be
days when you will say, ‘Blessed is the womb that has not
conceived and the breasts that have not given milk.’”
80
(1) Jesus said, “Whoever has come to know the world has
discovered the body, (2) and whoever has discovered the body, of
that person the world is not worthy.”
81
(1) Jesus said, “Let one who has become wealthy reign, (2) and let
one who has power renounce it.”
82
(1) Jesus said, “Whoever is near me is near the fire, (2) and
whoever is far from me is far from the kingdom.”
83
(1) Jesus said, “Images are visible to people, but the light within
them is hidden in the image of the Father’s light. (2) He will be
disclosed, but his image is hidden by his light.”
84
(1) Jesus said, “When you see your likeness, you are happy. (2)
But when you see your images that came into being before you and
that neither die nor become visible, how much you will bear!”
85
(1) Jesus said, “Adam came from great power
 and great wealth,
but he was not worthy of you. (2) For had he been worthy, [he
would] not [have tasted] death.”
86
(1) Jesus said, “[Foxes

 have] their dens and birds have their
nests, (2) but the child of humanity
 has no place to lay his head
and rest.”
87
(1) Jesus said, “How miserable is the body that depends on a body,
(2) and how miserable is the soul that depends on these two.”
88
(1) Jesus said, “The messengers
 and the prophets will come to
you and give you what is yours. (2) You, in turn, give them what
you have, and say to yourselves, ‘When will they come and take
what is theirs?’”
89
(1) Jesus said, “Why do you wash the outside of the cup? (2) Don’t
you understand that the one who made the inside is also the one
who made the outside?”
90
(1) Jesus said, “Come to me, for my yoke is easy and my
mastery
 is gentle, (2) and you will find rest for yourselves.”
91
(1) They said to him, “Tell us who you are so that we may believe
in you.”

(2) He said to them, “You examine the face of heaven and
earth, but you have not come to know the one who is in your
presence, and you do not know how to examine this moment.”
92
(1) Jesus said, “Seek and you will find.
 (2) In the past, however,
I did not tell you the things about which you asked me then. Now I
am willing to tell them, but you are not seeking them.
93
(1) “Do not give what is holy to dogs, or they might throw them
upon the manure pile. (2) Do not throw pearls [to] swine, or they
might make [mud] of it.”
94
(1) Jesus [said], “One who seeks will find; (2) for [one who
knocks] it will be opened.”
95
(1) [Jesus said], “If you have money,

 do not lend it at interest.
(2) Rather, give [it] to someone from whom you will not get it
back.”
96
(1) Jesus [said], “The Father’s kingdom is like a woman. (2) She
took a little yeast, [hid] it in dough, and made it into large loaves
of bread. (3) Whoever has ears should hear.”
97
(1) Jesus said, “The [Father’s] kingdom is like a woman who was
carrying a [jar] full of meal. (2) While she was walking along a
distant road, the handle of the jar broke and the meal spilled
behind her [along] the road. (3) She did not know it; she had not
noticed a problem.
 (4) When she reached her house, she put the
jar down and discovered that it was empty.”
98
(1) Jesus said, “The Father’s kingdom is like a person who wanted
to put someone powerful to death. (2) While at home he drew his
sword and thrust it into the wall to find out whether his hand
would go in. (3) Then he killed the powerful one.”
99
(1) The disciples said to him, “Your brothers and your mother are
standing outside.”

(2) He said to them, “Those here who do the will of my Father
are my brothers and my mother. (3) They are the ones who will
enter my Father’s kingdom.”
100
(1) They showed Jesus a gold coin and said to him, “Caesar’s
people demand taxes from us.”

(2) He said to them, “Give Caesar the things that are Caesar’s,
(3) give God the things that are God’s, (4) and give me what is
mine.
101
(1) “Whoever does not hate [father] and mother as I do cannot be a
[disciple] of me, (2) and whoever does [not] love [father and]
mother as I do cannot be a [disciple of] me. (3) For my mother
[gave me

 falsehood],
 but my true [mother]
 gave me
life.”
102
Jesus said, “Woe to the Pharisees, for they are like a dog sleeping
in the cattle manger, for it does not eat or [let] the cattle eat.”
103
Jesus said, “Blessed is the person who knows at what point
 the
robbers are going to enter, so that [he] may arise, bring together his
estate, and arm himself before they enter.”
104
(1) They said to Jesus, “Come, let’s pray today and let’s fast.”

(2) Jesus said, “What sin have I committed, or how have I been
undone? (3) Rather, when the bridegroom leaves the wedding
chamber, then let people fast and pray.”
105
Jesus said, “Whoever knows the father and the mother will be
called the child of a whore.”
106
(1) Jesus said, “When you make the two into one, you will become
children of humanity,
 (2) and when you say, ‘Mountain, move
from here,’ it will move.”
107
(1) Jesus said, “The kingdom is like a shepherd who had a hundred
sheep. (2) One of them, the largest, went astray. He left the ninety-
nine and sought the one until he found it. (3) After he had gone to
this trouble, he said to the sheep, ‘I love you more than the ninety-
nine.’”
108
(1) Jesus said, “Whoever drinks from my mouth will become like
me; (2) I myself shall become that person, (3) and the hidden
things will be revealed to that person.”
109
(1) Jesus said, “The kingdom is like a person who had a treasure
hidden in his field but did not know it. (2) And [when] he died, he
left it to his [son]. The son [did] not know about it. He took over

 the field and sold it. (3) The buyer went plowing, [discovered]
the treasure, and began to lend money at interest to whomever he
wished.”
110
Jesus said, “Let someone who has found the world and has become
wealthy renounce the world.”
111
(1) Jesus said, “The heavens and the earth will roll up in your
presence, (2) and whoever is living from the living one will not see
death.”

(3) Doesn’t Jesus say, “Whoever has found oneself, of that
person the world is not worthy”?
112
(1) Jesus said, “Woe to the flesh that depends on the soul. (2) Woe
to the soul that depends on the flesh.”
113
(1) His disciples said to him, “When will the kingdom come?”

(2) “It will not come by watching for it. (3) It will not be
said,
 ‘Look, here it is,’ or ‘Look, there it is.’ (4) Rather, the
Father’s kingdom is spread out upon the earth, and people do not
see it.”
114
(1) Simon Peter said to them, “Mary should leave us, for females
are not worthy of life.”

(2) Jesus said, “Look, I shall guide her to make her male, so
that she too may become a living spirit resembling you males. (3)
For
 every female who makes herself male will enter heaven’s
kingdom.”
196
The Gospel According to Thomas
The Greek Gospel of Thomas

Prologue
[P. Oxy. 654]
 These are the [hidden] sayings [that] the living Jesus
spoke [and Judas, who is] also called Thomas, [recorded].
1
And he said, “[Whoever finds the interpretation] of these sayings
will not taste [death].”
2
(1) [Jesus says], “Let one who [seeks] not stop [seeking until] one
finds. (2) When one finds, [one will be astonished, (3) and having
been] astonished, one will reign, (4) and [having reigned], one will
[rest].”
3
(1) Jesus says, “[If] your leaders [say to you, ‘Look], the kingdom
is in heaven,’ the birds of [heaven will precede you. (2) If they say]
that it is under the earth, the fish of the sea [will enter, and will
precede] you. (3) And [God’s kingdom]
 is inside you [and outside
you. (4) Whoever] knows [oneself] will find this. [And when you]
know yourselves, [you will understand that] you are [children] of
the [living] Father. (5) [But if] you do [not] know yourselves, [you
are] in [poverty], and you are [poverty].”
4
(1) [Jesus says], “A [person old in] days will not hesitate to ask a
[little child seven] days old about the place of [life, and] that
person will [live]. (2) For many of the [first] will be [last, and
] the
last first, (3) and they [will become one].”
5
(1) Jesus says, “[Know what is before] your face, and [what is
hidden] from you will be disclosed [to you. (2) For there is
nothing] hidden that [will] not [become] apparent, (3) and nothing
buried that [will not be raised].”
6
(1) [His disciples] ask him and say, “How [shall we] fast? [How
shall] we [pray]? How [shall we give to charity]? What [diet] shall
[we] observe?”

(2) Jesus says, “[Do not lie, (3) and] do not do [what] you
[hate, (4) because all things are disclosed before] truth. (5) [For
there is nothing] hidden [that will not be apparent].”
[possible restoration]
 (1)…“Blessed is [the lion that a human
eats, and the] lion will be [human. (2) And cursed is the human]
that [a lion eats…].”
[possible restoration]
 (3) “…There [is light within a person] of
light, [and it shines on the whole] world. [If it does not shine, then]
it is [dark].”
26
[P. Oxy. 1]
 (2) “…and then you will see clearly to take out the
speck that is in your brother’s
 eye.”
27
(1) Jesus says, “If you do not fast from the world, you will not find
God’s kingdom. (2) And if you do not observe the Sabbath as a
Sabbath, you will not see the Father.”
28
(1) Jesus says, “I took my stand in the midst of the world, and in
flesh I appeared to them. (2) I found them all drunk, and I found
none of them thirsty. (3) My soul aches for the children of
humanity, because they are blind in their hearts and [do not]
see….”
(3) “[…comes to dwell in this] poverty.”
30
(1) [Jesus says], “Where there are [three, they are without] God,
(2) and where there is only [one], I say, I am with that one.
(2) “Lift up the stone, and you will find me there. (3) Split the
piece of wood, and I am there.”
31
(1) Jesus says, “A prophet is not acceptable in the prophet’s
hometown, (2) nor does a doctor perform healings on those who
know the doctor.”
32
Jesus says, “A city built on top of a high hill and fortified can
neither fall nor be hidden.”
33
(1) Jesus says, “<What> you hear in one ear of yours,
[proclaim…].”
36
[P. Oxy. 655]
 (1) [Jesus says, “Do not worry], from morning [to
nightfall nor] from evening [to] morning, either [about] your
[food], what [you will] eat, [or] about [your robe], what clothing
you [will] wear. (2) [You are much] better than the lilies, which do
not card or [spin]. (3) And since you have one article of clothing,
what
…you…?
 (4) Who might add to your stature? That is the
one who will give you your clothing.’”
37
(1) His disciples say to him, “When will you be revealed to us and
when shall we see you?”

(2) He says, “When you strip off your clothing and are not
ashamed, (3) […and you will not be afraid].”
38
(1) [Jesus says, “Often you have desired to hear these sayings of
mine], and [you have no one else from whom to hear them]. (2)
And [there will come days when you will seek me and you will not
find me].”
39
(1) [Jesus says, “The Pharisees and the scholars] have [taken the
keys] of [knowledge;
 they themselves] have [hidden them. (2)
Neither] have [they] entered, [nor] have they allowed those who
are in the process of] entering [to enter. (3) As for you, be as
shrewd] as [snakes and as] innocent [as doves].”
4
[Hippolytus,

Refutation of All Heresies

5.7.20]
 (1) “One who
seeks will find me in children from seven years, for there, hidden
in the fourteenth age,
 I am revealed.”
11
[Hippolytus,

Refutation of All Heresies

5.8.32]
 (3) “If you ate
dead things and made them living, what will you do if you eat
living things?”
