The Book of Thomas
Hidden Sayings (138, 1–4)
The hidden sayings that the Savior spoke to Judas Thomas, which I, Mathaias, in
turn recorded. I was walking, listening to them speak with each other.
Jesus Speaks with Brother Thomas (138, 4–21)
The Savior said, “Brother Thomas, while you are still in the world, listen to me
and I shall reveal to you what you have thought about in your heart.
“Since it is said that you are my twin and true friend, examine yourself and
understand who you are, how you exist, and how you will come to be. Since you
are to be called my brother, it is not fitting for you to be ignorant of yourself.
And I know that you have understood, for already you have understood that I am
the knowledge of truth. So while you are walking with me, though you do lack
understanding, already you have obtained knowledge and you will be called one
who knows himself. For those who have not known themselves have known
nothing, but those who have known themselves already have acquired
knowledge about the depth of the All. So then, my brother Thomas, you have
seen what is hidden from people, what they stumble against in their ignorance.”
The Hidden and the Visible (138, 21–139, 31)
Thomas said to the master, “That is why I beg you to tell me what I ask before
your ascension. When I hear from you about what is hidden, I can speak of it.
And it is clear to me that the truth is difficult to accomplish before people.”
The Savior answered and said, “If what is visible to you is obscure to you,
how can you comprehend what is invisible? If deeds of truth visible in the world
are difficult for you to accomplish, how will you accomplish things of the
exalted majesty and fullness, which are invisible? How will you be called
workers? You are beginners and have not attained the greatness of perfection.”
Thomas answered and said to the Savior, “Tell us about these things that you
say are invisible and hidden from us.”
The Savior said, “[All] bodies [have come into being in the same irrational

way] that animals are produced, and so they are visible, as [creatures lusting
after creatures]. Those that are above, however, [do not exist like] those that are
visible. Rather, [they] live  from their own root, and their crops nourish
them. But the visible bodies feed on creatures that are like them, and so the
bodies are subject to change. Whatever is subject to change will perish and be
lost, and henceforth has no hope of life, because this body is an animal body.
Just as an animal body perishes, these modeled forms also will perish. Are they
not from sexual intercourse like that of the animals? If the body too is from
intercourse, how will it give birth to anything different from them? So, then, you
are children until you become perfect.”
Thomas answered, “This is why I say to you, master, those who speak about
what is invisible and difficult to explain are like people who shoot their arrows at
a target during the night. Of course, they shoot their arrows as any people do,
since they are shooting at the target, but it is not visible. When light comes,
however, and banishes darkness, then the accomplishment of each person will be
clear. And you, our light, bring enlightenment, master.”
Jesus said, “It is through light that light exists.”
Thomas spoke and said, “Master, why does this visible light that shines for
people rise and set?”
The Savior said, “Blessed Thomas, surely this visible light has shone for you
not to keep you here, but that you might leave. And when all the chosen ones lay
down their animal nature, this light will withdraw up to its being, and its being
will welcome it to itself, because the light is a good helper.”
Wisdom and Foolishness (139, 31–141, 2)
The Savior continued and said, “Oh, unsearchable love of light! Oh, bitterness of
the fire! You blaze in the bodies of people and in the marrow of their bones,
blazing in them night and day, burning their limbs and [making] their minds
drunk and their souls deranged. [You dominate] males and females day and
night; you move [and arouse] them secretly and visibly. When the males are
[aroused, they are attracted to the] females and the females to the males. That is
why it is said  that everyone who seeks truth from true wisdom will
fashion wings to fly, fleeing from the passion that burns human spirits. And one
will fashion wings to flee from every visible spirit.”
Thomas answered and said, “Master, this is precisely what I ask you, since I
understand that you are beneficial to us through what you say.”
Again the Savior answered and said, “This is why we must speak to you,
because this is the teaching for the perfect. If you wish to become perfect, keep

these sayings. If not, the name for you is ‘ignorant,’ since an intelligent person
cannot associate with a fool. The intelligent person is perfect in all wisdom, but
to the fool good and evil are the same. The wise person will be nourished by
truth, and will be like a tree growing by the stream of water. Some people have
wings but rush toward visible things that are far from truth. The fire that guides
them gives them an illusion of truth. It will shine on them with a perishable
beauty, and it will imprison them in dark delight and capture them in sweetsmelling pleasure. And it will make them blind with insatiable desire, inflame
their souls, and be like a stake that is jammed into their heart and can never be
removed. Like a bit in the mouth, it leads them according to its own wish.
“It has bound them with its chains, and tied all their limbs with the bitterness
of the bondage of desire for those visible things that perish and change and
fluctuate impulsively. They have always been drawn downward. When they are
slain, they are drawn to all the animals of corruption.”
Thomas answered and said, “It is clear and has been said that [many are]…
those who do not know…soul.”
[The Savior] answered and said, “[Blessed] is the wise person who has
[sought truth, and] when it has been found, has rested  upon it forever, and
has not been afraid of those who wish to trouble him.”
Our Own and the Others (141, 2–142, 26)
Thomas answered and said, “Master, is it beneficial for us to rest among our
own?”
The Savior said, “Yes, it is useful, and it is good for you, since the things
visible among people will pass away. For the vessel of their flesh will pass away,
and when it disintegrates, it will come to be among visible things, among things
that can be seen. The visible fire gives them pain, because of the love of faith
they once had. They will be gathered back to the visible realm. Moreover,
among the invisible things, those who can see will perish, without the first love,
in their concern for this life and the burning of the fire. There is only a little time
before what is visible will pass away. Then shapeless phantoms will come and
dwell forever in the midst of the tombs on corpses, in pain and destruction of
soul.”
Thomas answered and said, “What can we say in the face of these things?
What shall we say to those who are blind? What teaching shall we give those
miserable mortals who say, ‘We have come to [do] good and not to curse,’ and
will [say] further, ‘If we had not been born in the flesh, we would not have
known iniquity’?”

The Savior said, “To tell the truth, do not think of these as human beings, but
regard them [as] animals. As animals devour each other, so people like this
devour each other. They are deprived of the kingdom, since they love the
delight of fire and are slaves of death and rush to deeds of corruption. They
fulfill the desire of their parents. They will be cast down into the abyss and be
afflicted by the compulsion of the bitterness of their evil nature. They will be
whipped to drive them down to a place they do not know, and they will leave
their limbs behind, not with fortitude but with despair. And they rejoice in [the
fire, they love] madness and derangement, because they are [fools]. They pursue
derangement, not realizing their madness but thinking they are wise. They…the
love of their body…,  their hearts turning to themselves and their thoughts
being on their affairs. But fire will consume them.”
Thomas answered and said, “Master, what can one cast down to them do? I
am very concerned about them, for many oppose them.”
The Savior answered and said, “What is evident to you?”
Judas, called Thomas, said, “Master, you should speak and I should listen.”
The Savior answered, “Listen to what I tell you and believe the truth. What
sows and what is sown will pass away in their fire, in fire and water, and will be
hidden in tombs of darkness. And after a long time the fruit of evil trees will
appear and be punished and slain in the mouths of animals and people through
the agency of the rains, the winds, the air, and the light shining above.”
Thomas answered, “You certainly have convinced us, master. We realize in
our hearts it is clearly so, and your word is not meager. But these sayings that
you tell us are laughable and ridiculous to the world, since they are not
understood. How can we go forth and preach them when we are [not] respected
in the world?”
Jesus Preaches About Judgment (142, 26–143, 7)
The Savior answered and said, “I tell you the truth, whoever listens to [your]
word and turns away or sneers at it or smirks at these things, I tell you the truth,
that person will be handed over to the ruler who is on high, who rules as king
over all the powers, and the ruler will turn him away and cast him down from on
high into the abyss, and he will be imprisoned in a cramped, dark place. So he
cannot turn or move because of the great depth of Tartaros and the
[burdensome bitterness] of Hades. Whoever relies on what [is brought] to him…
will not be forgiven [his] madness, but will [be judged. Whoever has] persecuted
you will be handed over to the angel Tartarouchos, [who has flaming] fire that
pursues them,  and fiery whips that spew forth sparks into the face of one

pursued. If he flees to the west, he finds fire. If he turns south, he finds it there as
well. If he turns north, the threat of erupting fire meets him again. Nor can he
find the way to the east, to flee there and be saved, for he did not find it while
embodied so as to find it on the day of judgment.”
Woes upon the Godless (143, 8–145, 1)
Then the Savior continued and said, “Woe to you, godless people, who have no
hope, who are secure in things that do not last.
“Woe to you who hope in the flesh and in the prison that will perish. How
long will you sleep and think that what is imperishable will also perish? Your
hope is based upon the world, and your god is this present life. You are
destroying your souls.
“Woe to you with the fire that burns within you. It is insatiable.
“Woe to you because of the wheel that turns in your minds.
“Woe to you because of the smoldering within you. It will devour your flesh
visibly, tear your souls secretly, and prepare you for each other.
“Woe to you, prisoners, for you are bound in caves. You laugh, you rejoice in
mad laughter. You do not perceive your destruction. Neither do you perceive
your plight, nor have you understood that you dwell in darkness and death.
Rather, you are drunk with fire and [full] of bitterness. Your hearts are deranged
because of the smoldering within you, and the poison and blows of your enemies
are a delight to you. Darkness has risen in you like the light, for you have
surrendered your freedom to slavery. You have darkened your hearts and
surrendered your minds to foolishness. You have filled your minds with the
smoke of the fire within you, and your light has been hidden in the [dark] cloud.
You [love] the garment you wear, [although it is filthy], and you have been
gripped [by] nonexistent hope. [You have] believed in what you do [not] know.
You all live in [bondage] but pride yourselves [in your freedom].  You
have baptized your souls in the water of darkness. You have pursued your own
wishes.
“Woe to you who dwell in error, not seeing that the light of the sun, which
judges the universe and looks down on the universe, will encircle everything to
make slaves of the enemies. Nor do you perceive how the moon looks down
night and day, seeing the bodies of your slaughters.
“Woe to you who love intercourse and filthy association with the female.
“And woe to you because of the powers of your bodies, for they will mistreat
you.
“Woe to you because of the actions of the evil demons.

“Woe to you who entice your limbs with fire. Who will sprinkle a restful dew
on you, to extinguish the many fires within you, and your burning? Who will
make the sun shine on you, to dispel the darkness within you and hide the
darkness and filthy water?
“The sun and the moon will give a fragrant aroma to you, as will the air, the
spirit, the earth, and the water. If the sun does not shine on these bodies, they
will rot and perish just like weeds or grass. If the sun shines on them, they grow
strong and choke the grapevine. But if the grapevine becomes strong and casts
its shadow over the weeds and all the rest of the brush growing with it, and
[spreads] and fills out, it alone inherits the land where it grows, and dominates
wherever it has cast its shadow. So when it grows, it dominates the whole land,
and it is productive for its master and pleases him greatly. He would have gone
to great pains because of the weeds before pulling them out, but the grapevine by
itself disposed of them and choked them, and they died and became like earth.”
Then Jesus continued and said to them, “Woe to you, for you have not
accepted the teaching, and those who [wish to accept it] will suffer when they
preach. [You will persecute them], but you will rush into [your own traps]. You
will cast them down [to the lions] and put them to death, daily,  and they
will rise from death.
Blessed Are You (145, 1–19)
“Blessed are you who understand beforehand the temptations and flee from
things that are alien.
“Blessed are you who are mocked and are not respected because of the love
your master has for you.
“Blessed are you who weep and are oppressed by those who have no hope,
for you will be released from all bondage.
“Watch and pray that you may not remain in the flesh, but that you may
leave the bondage of the bitterness of this life. And when you pray, you will find
rest, for you have left pain and reproach behind. When you leave the pains and
the passions of the body, you will receive rest from the Good One. You will
reign with the King, you united with him and he with you, from now on and
forever. Amen.”
The Book of Thomas
The Contender Writing

to the Perfect
Scribal Note (145, 20–23)
Remember me also, my brothers, in your prayers. Peace be with the holy and
the spiritual.
