The Nature of the Rulers
The Real Nature of the Authorities (86, 20–27)
Concerning the reality of the authorities the great apostle through the spirit of
the Father of truth, referred to the authorities of darkness and told us “our
struggle is not against flesh and [blood] but against the authorities of the world
and the spirits of wickedness.” I have sent you this writing because you have
asked about the real nature of the authorities.
The Blind Demiurge (86, 27–87, 23)
The leader of the authorities is blind. [Because of his] power, ignorance, and
arrogance he said, with [power], “I am God; there is no other [but me].”
When he said this, he sinned against [the realm of the All]. This boast rose
up to Incorruptibility and a voice answered from Incorruptibility and said,
“You are wrong, Samael”—which means “blind god.”
His thoughts were blind. He expressed his power—that is, the blasphemy he
had uttered—and pursued it down to chaos and his mother the abyss, at the
instigation of Pistis Sophia She established each of his offspring according to
its power, after the pattern of the eternal realms above. For the visible
originated from the invisible.
Incorruptibility looked down into the region of the waters. Her image
appeared as a reflection in the waters, and the authorities of darkness fell in love
with her. But they could not grasp the image that appeared to them in the waters,
for they were weak, and what is only of soul cannot grasp what is of spirit. For
the authorities were from below, but the image of Incorruptibility was from
above.
This is why Incorruptibility looked down into that region, so that, by the
Father’s will, she might bring all into union with the light.
The Creation of Adam and Eve (87, 23–89, 17)
The rulers made plans and said, “Come, let’s create a human of soil from the
earth.” They formed their creature as a being entirely of the earth

These archons have bodies that are both female [and male], and faces that are
the faces of beasts They took [soil] from the earth and formed [their human],
after their own bodies and [after the image] of God that had appeared [to them]
in the water
They said, “[Come], let’s grasp the image by means of the form we have
shaped, [so that] the image may see its male partner [and fall in love with it],
and we may seize it with the form we have shaped.” They did not
understand the power of God, because they are powerless.
Samael blew into his face, and the human acquired a soul and stayed upon
the ground for many days. The rulers could not make him arise, because they are
powerless. Like storm winds they kept on blowing, that they might try to capture
the image that appeared to them in the waters. And they did not know what its
power was
All these things came to be by the will of the Father of the All.
Later the Spirit saw the person of soul upon the ground. The Spirit came
forth from the adamantine land It descended and made its home within him,
and that person became a living soul And the Spirit called his name Adam,
since he was found moving around upon the ground
A voice came from Incorruptibility to help Adam. The rulers gathered all the
animals of the earth and all the birds of the sky and brought them to Adam to see
what Adam would call them, that he might give a name to each of the birds and
all the animals
The rulers took Adam and put him in the garden, that he might cultivate it
and watch over it. They commanded him and said, “You may eat from [every]
tree in the garden, but do not eat from the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
Do not [touch] it, for the day you eat from it, you will surely die.”
They [said this to him], but they did not understand what [they said] to him.
Rather, by the Father’s will, they said this in such a way that Adam might
eat, and Adam might <not>26 perceive them as would a completely material
person.
The rulers plotted together and said, “Come, let’s make a deep sleep fall
upon Adam.” So Adam slept. The deep sleep they made to fall upon him, and
he slept, is ignorance. They cut open his side…like a living woman Then they
repaired his side with flesh in place of her, and Adam had only a soul.
The woman of spirit came to him and spoke with him, saying, “Arise,
Adam.”
When he saw her, he said, “You have given me life. You will be called the
Mother of the living.

For she is my mother.
She is physician
woman,
one who has given birth.”
Adam and Eve in the Garden (89, 17–90, 12)
The authorities approached their Adam. When they saw his female partner
speaking with him, they became aroused and lusted after her. They said to each
other, “Come, let’s ejaculate our semen in her,” and they chased her. But she
laughed at them because of their foolishness and blindness. In their grasp she
turned into a tree and when she left for them a shadow of herself that looked
like her, they defiled it sexually. They defiled the seal of her voice, and so they
convicted themselves through the form they had shaped in their own image
Then the female spiritual presence came in the shape of the serpent, the
instructor. The serpent taught Adam and Eve and said, “What did Samael [say
to] you? Did he say, ‘You may eat from every tree in the garden, but do not eat
from [the tree] of knowledge of good and evil’?”
The woman of flesh said, “Not only did he say ‘Do not eat,’ but also ‘Do
not touch it. For the day you eat from it, you will surely die.’”
The serpent, the instructor, said, “You will not surely die, for he said this to
you out of jealousy. Rather, your eyes will open and you will be like gods,
knowing good and evil.” And the female instructor was taken away from the
serpent, and she abandoned it as something of the earth.
They Eat from the Tree (90, 13–91, 11)
The woman of flesh took from the tree and ate, and she gave to her husband as
well, and thus these beings, who had only a soul, ate. Their imperfection became
apparent in their ignorance. They recognized that they were stripped of the
spiritual, and they took fig leaves and tied them around their naked bodies
The leader of the archons came and said, “Where are you, Adam?” For he
did not know what had happened.
Adam said, “I heard your voice and was afraid because I was naked, and so I
hid.”
The ruler said, “Why did you hide, unless it is because you ate from the only
tree from which I commanded you not to eat? You did eat!”
Adam said, “The woman you gave me [offered] me the fruit, and I ate.” And
the arrogant [ruler] cursed the woman.

The woman said, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate.” [The rulers turned] to
the serpent and cursed its shadow, [so that it was] powerless, and they did not
know it was a form they themselves had shaped From then on, the serpent was
under the curse of the authorities. The curse was on the serpent until the
perfect human was to come.
The rulers turned to their Adam. They took him and cast him and his wife
out of the garden. They have no blessing, for they are also under the curse.
The rulers threw humanity into great confusion and a life of toil, so that their
people might be preoccupied with things of the world and not have time to be
occupied with the holy Spirit
Cain, Abel, Seth, Norea (91, 11–92, 4)
After this Eve gave birth to Cain, their son, and Cain farmed the land. Then
Adam had sex with his wife. She became pregnant again and gave birth to Abel,
and Abel was a shepherd. Cain brought in produce from his field, and Abel
brought in an offering from his lambs. God looked with favor upon the offering
of Abel, but he did not accept the offerings of Cain. Cain, man of flesh, pursued
Abel his brother.
God said to Cain, “Where is your brother Abel?”
Cain answered and said, “Am I my brother’s keeper?”
God said to Cain, “Listen. The voice of your brother’s blood is calling to me.
You have sinned with your mouth, and it will come back to you. Whoever kills
Cain will release seven vendettas, and you will live groaning and shaking upon
the earth.”
Adam [had sex] with his partner Eve again. She became pregnant and bore
[Seth] for Adam. She said, “I have given birth to [another] person through God,
in place [of Abel].”
Eve became pregnant again and gave birth to [Norea] Eve said, “He has
produced for me a virgin to help many human generations.” Norea is the
virgin whom the forces did not defile.
And humanity began to multiply and develop.
Noah and the Flood (92, 4–18)
The rulers plotted together and said, “Come, let’s cause a flood with our own
hands and destroy all flesh, animal and human.”
When the ruler of the forces learned of their plan, he said to Noah, “Make
an ark of wood that will not rot and hide in it, you and your children and the

animals and the birds of the sky, large and small. Put it on Mount Sir.”
Orea came to Noah and wanted to board the ark. When he would not let
her, she blew on the ark and made it burn up. So he rebuilt the ark.
Norea Opposes the Rulers (92, 18–93, 13)
The rulers went to meet Norea, for they planned to seduce her. Their leader said
to her, “Your mother Eve came to us.”
But Norea turned to them and said, “You are the rulers of the darkness.
Damn you! You did not have sex with my mother but with one of your own ilk.
For I am not from you. I am from the world above.”
The arrogant ruler turned, with his might, and his expression was like a
blazing [fire] He was bold toward her and [said], “You must serve us sexually,
as your mother Eve did, for I have been given….”
But Norea turned with the power of [God] and called in a loud voice to the
holy one, the God of the All, “Help me with these unrighteous rulers and
rescue me from their hands—now!”
An angel came down from heaven and said to her, “Why are you calling to
God? Why are you so bold toward the holy Spirit?”
Norea said, “Who are you?”
The unrighteous rulers had left her. The angel said, “I am Eleleth,
Understanding, the great angel who stands before the holy Spirit. I have been
sent to speak with you and rescue you from the hand of the lawless ones. And I
shall teach you about your root.”
The Dialogue of Norea and Eleleth (93, 13–32)
I cannot describe the power of that angel. Its appearance is like fine gold and
its garment is like snow. My mouth simply cannot bear to speak of its power and
the appearance of its face.
The great angel Eleleth spoke to me and said, “I am Understanding; I am one
of the Four Luminaries who stand before the great invisible Spirit Do you
think these rulers have power over you? None of them can overpower the root of
truth, for on behalf of the root of truth a figure has appeared in the last days,
and these authorities will be restrained. These authorities cannot defile you or
that generation for your home is with Incorruptibility, where the virgin Spirit
dwells, who is superior to the authorities of chaos and their world.”
Eleleth’s Story of Creation (93, 32–95, 13)

I said, “My lord, teach me about the [power of] these authorities. [How] did
they come into being? With what kind of nature?57 Of what material? Who
created them and their power?”
The great angel Eleleth, who is understanding, said to me, “Incorruptibility
dwells within infinite realms. Sophia, who is called Pistis wanted to create
something by herself, without her partner, and what she produced was from
above.
“There is a curtain between the realms above and the aeons below. A shadow
formed beneath the curtain and the shadow became matter, and the shadow
was cast into a region.
“What she produced came to be something material like an aborted fetus. It
took shape from the shadow, and it became an arrogant beast resembling a lion.
It was androgynous, as I already said, because it came from matter
“The beast opened his eyes and saw a vast amount of matter without limit,
and he became arrogant and said, ‘I am God, and there is none but me.’
“When he said this, he sinned against the realm of the All. A voice came
from above the tyrannical realm and said, ‘You are wrong, Samael’—which
means ‘blind god.’
“He said, ‘If anything exists before me, let me see it.’
“At once Sophia pointed her finger and brought light into matter, and she
pursued it down to the region of chaos. When she returned up to her light,
darkness once again [came upon] matter.
“This ruler was androgynous and made himself a huge realm, an expanse
without limit. He considered creating for himself offspring, and he created
for himself seven offspring, androgynous like their parent.
“He said to his children, ‘I am God of all.’
“Zoe daughter of Pistis Sophia called out and said to him, ‘You are wrong,
Sakla,’ whose name is understood as Yaldabaoth Zoe breathed into his face,
and her breath became for her a fiery angel, and that angel bound Yaldabaoth
and cast him down into Tartaros, at the bottom of the abyss
The Story of Sabaoth (95, 13–96, 17)
“When Sabaoth son of Yaldabaoth saw the strength of that angel, he repented
and condemned his father and his mother, matter.
“Sabaoth loathed his mother but he sent songs of praise up to Sophia and
her daughter Zoe. Sophia and Zoe took him up and established him over the
seventh heaven, below the curtain between what is above and what is below. He
is called ‘god of the powers, Sabaoth,’ because he is above the powers of chaos,

for Sophia established him.
“When these things happened, Sabaoth made himself a huge four-faced
chariot of cherubim, and an infinity of angels as ministers, and harps and lyres
“Sophia took her daughter Zoe and made her sit at his right to teach him
about the things that are in the eighth heaven and she put the angel of wrath at
his left. [Since] that day, [his right] had been called ‘life,’ and the left has
represented the unrighteousness of the tyrannical realm above. These things
happened before your time.
“When Yaldabaoth saw Sabaoth exalted in such great glory on high, he
envied him, and his envy became something androgynous. This was the
beginning of envy. Envy produced death, death produced children, and death put
each in charge of a heaven. All the heavens of chaos were full of their masses.
“But all these things came to be by the will of the Father of the All, after the
pattern of all that is above, so that the sum total of chaos might be reached
“Look, I have taught you about the form of the rulers, the matter in which the
form was produced, their parent, and their world.”
Conclusion (96, 17–97, 23)
I said, “My lord, am I also from their matter?”
“You and your offspring are from the Father, who was from the beginning.
The souls come from above, from incorruptible light So the authorities cannot
approach them because of the spirit of truth within them, and all who know this
way of truth are deathless among dying humanity.
“But that offspring will not appear now. It will appear after three ages and
free them from the bondage of the authorities’ error.”
I said, “My lord, how long will it be?”
He said to me, “Until the time when the true human in human form reveals
[the spirit of] truth that the Father has sent.
“Then he will teach them about everything and anoint them with the oil of
eternal life, given from the generation without a king.
“Then they will be freed of blind thought. They will trample death, which is
of the authorities. And they will ascend into the infinite light where this
offspring is.
“Then the authorities will surrender their years and ages. Their angels will
weep over their destruction, and their demons will mourn over their death.
“Then all the children of the light will know the truth, and their root, and the
Father of the All, and the holy Spirit. They will all say with one voice:

The Father’s truth is just,
the child is over all
and with everyone,
forever and ever.
Holy, holy, holy!81
Amen.”
