The Gospel of Philip
Converts (51, 29–52, 2)
A Hebrew makes a Hebrew, and such a person is called a convert. A convert
does not make a convert. [Some people] are as they [are] and make others [like
them], while others simply are.
Inheriting the Living and the Dead (52, 2–15)
A slave seeks only to be free and does not seek the master’s estate.
For a child it is not enough to be a child, but a child claims the father’s
inheritance.
Heirs to the dead are dead, and what they inherit is dead. Heirs to the living
are alive, and they inherit both the living and the dead. The dead inherit nothing,
for how could a dead person inherit? If a dead person inherits the living, the
living will not die and the dead will come to life.
Jesus, Gentiles, Christians (52, 15–24)
A gentile does not die, never having been alive so as to die. One who has
believed in truth is alive, but this person is at risk of dying just by being alive.
Since Christ came, the world has been created, cities have been beautified,
and the dead have been buried.
When we were Hebrews we were orphans, with only a mother, but when we
became Christians we had a father and a mother.
Sowing and Reaping (52, 25–35)
Whoever sows in winter reaps in summer. Winter is the world, summer is the
other aeon, the eternal realm. Let’s sow in the world to reap in summer. And for
this reason we should not pray in winter.
From winter comes summer. If someone reaps in winter, the person will not
really reap but will pull out the young plants, and such do not produce a crop.
[That person’s field] is barren not only [now] but also on the Sabbath.

Christ Came (52, 35–53, 14)
Christ came to purchase some, to save some, to redeem some. He purchased
strangers and made them his own, and he brought back his own whom he had
laid down of his own will as a deposit. Not only when he appeared did he lay the
soul of his own will as a deposit, but from the beginning of the world he laid
down the soul, for the proper moment, according to his will. Then he came forth
to take it back, since it had been laid down as a deposit. It had fallen into the
hands of robbers and had been stolen, but he saved it. And he redeemed the good
in the world and the bad.
Light and Darkness (53, 14–23)
Light and darkness, life and death, and right and left are siblings of one another,
and inseparable. For this reason the good are not good, the bad are not bad, life
is not life, and death is not death. Each will dissolve into its original nature, but
what is superior to the world cannot be dissolved, for it is eternal.
Words and Names (53, 23–54, 5)
The names of worldly things are utterly deceptive, for they turn the heart from
what is real to what is unreal. Whoever hears the word “god” thinks not of what
is real but rather of what is unreal. So also with the words “father,” “son,” “holy
spirit,” “life,” “light,” “resurrection,” “church,” and all the rest, people do not
think of what is real but of what is unreal, [though] the words refer to what is
real. The words [that are] heard belong to this world. [Do not be] deceived.
If words belonged to the eternal realm, they would never be pronounced in this
world, nor would they designate worldly things. They would refer to what is in
the eternal realm.
The Name of the Father (54, 5–13)
Only one name is not pronounced in the world, the name the Father gave the
Son. It is the name above all; it is the Father’s name. For the Son would not have
become Father if he had not put on the Father’s name. Those who have this
name understand it but do not speak it. Those who do not have it cannot even
understand it.
Truth (54, 13–18)

Truth brought forth names in the world for us, and no one can refer to truth
without names. Truth is one and many, for our sakes, to teach us about the one,
in love, through the many.
The Archons (54, 18–31)
The rulers wanted to fool people, since they saw that people have a kinship with
what is truly good. They took the names of the good and assigned them to what
is not good, to fool people with names and link the names to what is not good.
So, as if they are doing people a favor, they take names from what is not good
and transfer them to the good, in their own way of thinking. For they wished to
take free people and enslave them forever.
The Forces (54, 31–55, 5)
There are forces that do [favors] for people. They do not want people to come to
[salvation], but they want their own existence to continue. For if people come to
salvation, sacrifice will [stop]…and animals will not be offered up to the
forces. In fact, those to whom sacrifices were made were animals. The animals
were offered up alive, and after being offered they died. But a human being
was offered up to God dead, and the human being came alive.
Christ Brought Bread (55, 6–14)
Before Christ came there was no bread in the world, just as paradise, where
Adam lived, had many trees for animal food but no wheat for human food, and
people ate like animals. But when Christ, the perfect human, came, he brought
bread from heaven, that humans might be fed with human food.
The Archons and the Holy Spirit (55, 14–19)
The rulers thought they did all they did by their own power and will, but the
Holy Spirit was secretly accomplishing all through them by the Spirit’s will.
Sowing and Reaping Truth (55, 19–22)
Truth, which has existed from the beginning, is sown everywhere, and many see
it being sown, but few see it being reaped.
Mary Conceiving (55, 23–33)

Some said Mary became pregnant by the Holy Spirit. They are wrong and do
not know what they are saying. When did a woman ever get pregnant by a
woman?
Mary is the virgin whom none of the powers defiled. This is greatly
repugnant to the Hebrews, who are the apostles and apostolic persons. This
virgin whom none of the powers defiled [wishes that] the powers would defile
themselves.
My Father (55, 33–36)
The master [would] not have said, “My [Father who is] in heaven,” if [he] did
not also have another father. He would simply have said, “[My Father].”
Take from Every House (55, 37–56, 3)
The master said to the disciples, “[Take something] from every house and
bring it to the Father’s house, but do not steal while in the Father’s house and
take something away.”
Jesus Is a Hidden Name (56, 3–13)
Jesus is a hidden name, Christ is a revealed name. The name Jesus does not
exist in any other language, but he is called by the name Jesus. The word for
Christ in Syriac is messias and in Greek is christos, and likewise all other people
have a word for it in their own language. Nazarene is the revealed form of the
hidden name.
Christ Has Everything (56, 13–15)
Christ has everything within himself, whether human or angel or mystery, and
the Father.
Christ Arose, Then Died (56, 15–20)
Those who say that the master first died and then arose are wrong, for he first
arose and then died. If someone is not first resurrected, wouldn’t that person die?
As God lives, that one would <die>.
The Precious in the Worthless (56, 20–26)

No one would hide something valuable and precious in a valuable container, but
countless sums are commonly kept in a container worth only a cent. So it is
with the soul. It is something precious, and it has come to be in a worthless body.
Naked and Not Naked (56, 26–57, 22)
Some people are afraid that they may arise from the dead naked, and so they
want to arise in flesh. They do not know that it is those who wear the [flesh] who
are naked. Those who are [able] to take it off are not naked.
“Flesh [and blood will] not inherit God’s kingdom.” What is this flesh that
will not inherit? It is what we are wearing. And what is this flesh that will
inherit? It is the flesh and blood of Jesus.
For this reason he said, “One who does not eat my flesh and drink my blood
does not have life within.” What does this mean? His flesh is the word and his
blood is the Holy Spirit. Whoever has received these has food, drink, and
clothing.
And I also disagree with others who say that the flesh will not arise. Both
views are wrong. You say that the flesh will not arise? Then tell me what will
arise, so we may salute you. You say it is the spirit in the flesh, and also the light
in the flesh? But what is in the flesh is the word, and what you are talking about
is nothing other than flesh. It is necessary to arise in this sort of flesh, since
everything exists in it.
In this world those who wear clothes are superior to the clothes. In heaven’s
kingdom the clothes are superior to those who wear them.
Baptism and Anointing (57, 22–28)
By water and fire this whole realm is purified, the visible by the visible, the
hidden by the hidden. Some things are hidden by the visible. There is water
within water, there is fire within the oil of anointing.
Jesus Tricked Everyone (57, 28–58, 10)
Jesus tricked everyone, for he did not appear as he was, but he appeared so that
he could be seen. He appeared to everyone. He [appeared] to the great as great,
he [appeared] to the small as small, he [appeared to the] angels as an angel
and to humans as a human. For this reason his word was hidden from everyone.
Some looked at him and thought they saw themselves. But when he appeared to
his disciples in glory upon the mountain, he was not small. He became great. Or

rather, he made the disciples great, so they could see him in his greatness.
Prayer of Thanksgiving (58, 10–14)
He said on that day in the prayer of thanksgiving,
You who have united perfect light with Holy Spirit,
unite the angels also with us, as images.
The Lamb (58, 14–15)
Do not despise the lamb, for without it no one could see the <king>.
Meeting the King (58, 15–17)
No one can meet the king while naked.
Children of the Perfect Human (58, 17–59, 6)
The heavenly person has more children than the earthly person. If the children of
Adam are numerous but die, how much more numerous are the children of the
perfect human, who do not die but are continually being born.
A father produces children but a child cannot produce children. One who has
just been born cannot be a parent. Rather, a child gets brothers and sisters, not
children.
All who are born in the world are born of nature, and the others [are
nourished] from where they are born. People [are] nourished from the promise of
the heavenly place. [If they would be]…from the mouth, from which the word
comes, they would be nourished from the mouth and would be perfect.
The perfect conceive and give birth through a kiss. That is why we also kiss
each other. We conceive from the grace within each other.
Three Women Named Mary (59, 6–11)
Three women always walked with the master: Mary his mother, <his> sister,
and Mary of Magdala, who is called his companion. For “Mary” is the name of
his sister, his mother, and his companion.
Father, Son, Holy Spirit (59, 11–18)

“Father” and “son” are simple names, “holy spirit” is a double name. They are
everywhere, above and below, in the hidden and in the visible. The Holy Spirit is
in the visible, and then it is below, and the Holy Spirit is in the hidden, and then
it is above.
Holy Spirit and Evil Forces (59, 18–27)
Evil forces serve the saints, for they have been blinded by the Holy Spirit into
thinking they are helping their own people when they really are helping the
saints.
So a disciple once asked the master for something from the world and he
said, “Ask your mother, and she will give you something from another realm.”
Wisdom and Salt (59, 27–60, 1)
The apostles said to the disciples, “May our entire offering be provided with
salt.” For they called [Wisdom] salt. Without it an offering is unacceptable.
Wisdom is barren, [with no] children, and so she is called [the pillar] of salt.
Whenever…the Holy Spirit…, and she has many children.
Father and Child (60, 1–6)
A father’s possessions belong to his child. As long as the child is young, the
child will not have what belongs to it. When the child grows up, the father will
turn over all the possessions.
The Lost (60, 6–9)
Those who have gone astray, who are offspring of the Spirit, go astray also
because of the Spirit. Thus from one Spirit the fire blazes and the fire is
extinguished.
Wisdom and Wisdom of Death (60, 10–15)
There is Echamoth and there is Echmoth. Echamoth is simply Wisdom, but
Echmoth is the Wisdom of death—that is, the Wisdom that knows death, that is
called little Wisdom.
Tame and Wild Animals (60, 15–34)

Some animals are tame, such as the bull, the donkey, and the like, while others
are wild and live off in the wild. People plow fields with tame animals, and as a
result people are nourished, together with animals, whether tame or wild.
So also the perfect human plows with powers that are tame and prepares
everything to come into being. Thus the whole place has stability, good and evil,
right and left. The Holy Spirit tends everything and rules over [all] the powers,
whether tame or wild and running loose. For the Spirit is [resolved] to corral
them, so that they cannot escape even if [they] wish.
Adam and Cain (60, 34–61, 12)
[The one] created was [noble, and you would] expect his children to be
noble. If he had not been created but rather had been conceived, you would
expect his offspring to be noble. But in fact he was created, and then he
produced offspring.
And what nobility this is! First came adultery, then murder. One was born
of adultery, for he was the son of the serpent. He became a murderer, like his
father, and he killed his brother. Every act of sexual intercourse between those
unlike each other is adultery.
God the Dyer (61, 12–20)
God is a dyer. Just as the good dyes, said to be genuine dyes, dissolve into what
is dyed in them, so also those whom God dyes become immortal through his
colors, for his dyes are immortal. And God dips those to be dipped in water.
Seeing (61, 20–35)
People cannot see anything that really is without becoming like it. It is not so
with people in the world, who see the sun without becoming the sun and see the
sky and earth and everything else without becoming them.
Rather, in the realm of truth,
you have seen things there and have become those things,
you have seen the Spirit and have become Spirit,
you have seen Christ and have become Christ,
you have seen the [Father] and will become Father.
[Here] in the world you see everything but do not [see] yourself, but there in
that realm you see yourself, and you will [become] what you see.

Faith and Love (61, 36–62, 6)
Faith receives, love gives. [No one can receive] without faith, and no one
can give without love. So to receive we have faith and to love we give. If
someone gives without love, that person gets no benefit from what was given.
Anyone who receives something but does not receive the Lord is still a
Hebrew.
Jesus’s Names (62, 6–17)
The apostles who came before us used the names I sous naz raios messias,
which means “Jesus the Nazorean, the Christ.” The last name is “Christ,” the
first name is “Jesus,” the middle name is “the Nazarene.” Messias has two
meanings, “Christ” and “measured.” In Hebrew “Jesus” means
“redemption.” Nazara means “truth,” and so “the Nazarene” means “truth.”
“Christ” has been “measured,” thus “the Nazarene” and “Jesus” have been
measured out.
A Pearl in Mud (62, 17–26)
If a pearl is thrown into mud, it will not lose its value, and if it is anointed with
balsam, it will not increase its value. It is always precious in its owner’s eyes.
Likewise, the children of God are precious in the eyes of the Father, whatever
their circumstances of life.
The Name Christian (62, 26–35)
If you say, “I am a Jew,” no one will be moved. If you say, “I am a Roman,” no
one will be disturbed. If you say, “I am a Greek, barbarian, slave, free,” no one
will be troubled. If you say, “I am a Christian,” the [world] will be shaken. May I
[receive the one] whose name the [world] cannot bear to hear.
God Is a Man-Eater (62, 35–63, 4)
God is a man-eater, and so humans are [sacrificed] to him. Before humans
were sacrificed, animals were sacrificed, because those to whom they were
sacrificed were not gods.
Glass and Ceramic Vessels (63, 5–11)
Glass and ceramic vessels are both made with fire. If glass vessels break, they

are redone, since they have been made through breath. But if ceramic vessels
break, they are destroyed, since they have been made without breath.
A Donkey Turning a Millstone (63, 11–21)
A donkey turning a millstone walked a hundred miles. When it was set loose, it
found itself in the same place. Some people travel long distances but get
nowhere. By nightfall they have seen no cities or villages, nothing man-made or
natural, no powers or angels. These miserable people have labored in vain.
The Eucharist and Jesus (63, 21–24)
The eucharist is Jesus. In Syriac it is called pharisatha, which means “that which
is spread out.” For Jesus came to crucify the world.
The Dye Works of Levi (63, 25–30)
The master went into the dye works of Levi, took seventy-two colored cloths,
and threw them into a vat. He drew them out and they all were white. He said,
“So the son of humanity has come as a dyer.”
Wisdom and Mary of Magdala (63, 30–64, 9)
Wisdom, who is called barren, is the Mother of the angels.
The companion of the [Savior] is Mary of Magdala. The [Savior loved] her
more than [all] the disciples, [and he] kissed her often on her [mouth].
The other [disciples] …said to him, “Why do you love her more than all
of us?”
The Savior answered and said to them, “Why don’t I love you like her? If a
blind person and one who can see are both in darkness, they are the same. When
the light comes, one who can see will see the light, and the blind person will stay
in darkness.”
One Who Is (64, 9–12)
The master said, “Blessed is one who is before coming into being. For whoever
is, was and will be.”
Human Beings and Animals (64, 12–22)

The superiority of human beings is not apparent to the eye, but lies in what is
hidden. Consequently, they are dominant over animals that are stronger than they
are and greater in ways apparent and hidden. So animals survive. But when
human beings leave them, animals kill and devour each other. Animals have
eaten each other because they have found no other food. Now, however, they
have food, because humans till the ground.
Going Down into the Water (64, 22–31)
Anyone who goes down into the water and comes up without receiving
anything and says, “I am a Christian,” has borrowed the name. But one who
receives the Holy Spirit has the name as a gift. A gift does not have to be paid
back, but what is borrowed must be paid. This is how it is with us, when one of
us experiences a mystery.
Marriage (64, 31–65, 1)
The mystery of marriage is great. [Without] it, the world would [not] exist. The
existence of [the world depends on] people, and the existence [of people depends
on] marriage. Then think of the power of [pure] intercourse, though its image
 is defiled.
Unclean Spirits (65, 1–26)
Unclean spirits are male and female in form. Males have sex with souls that are
female in form, and females cavort promiscuously with souls that are male in
form. Souls cannot escape them if the spirits seize them, unless they receive the
male or female power of the bridegroom and the bride. These are received from
the mirrored bridal chamber.
When foolish females see a man by himself, they jump on him, fondle him,
and pollute him. Likewise, when foolish males see a beautiful woman by herself,
they seduce and violate her in order to pollute her. But when they see a husband
and wife together, the females cannot make advances on the man and the males
cannot make advances on the woman. So also if the image and the angel are
joined, none can dare to make advances on the male or the female.
Whoever Leaves the World (65, 27–66, 6)
Whoever leaves the world can no longer be held back as if still in the world.
Such a person clearly is beyond desire…and fear, is dominant…, and is above

envy.
If…, that person is grasped and choked. How can that person escape the
[great grasping powers]? How can that person [hide from them]?
Some [say], “We are faithful,” in order that they [may escape unclean]
spirits and demons. For if they had the Holy Spirit, no unclean spirit could grab
them.
Do not fear the flesh and do not love it. If you fear the flesh, it will dominate
you. If you love the flesh, it will swallow you up and strangle you.
This World, the Resurrection, and the Middle (66, 7–21)
A person is either in this world or in the resurrection—or in the middle place.
May I not be found there! In this world there is good and evil, but the good of
the world is not really good and the evil of the world is not really evil. After this
world there is evil that is really evil: this is called the middle. The middle is
death. As long as we are in this world, we should acquire resurrection, so that
when we take off the flesh we may be found in rest and not wander in the
middle. For many go astray on the way.
Will and Action (66, 21–29)
It is good to leave the world before one sins. Some have neither the will nor the
strength to act. Others, even if they have the will, do themselves no good, for
they have not acted. And if they do not have the will…. Righteousness is beyond
their grasp, in either case. It always comes down to the will, not the action.
Vision of Hell (66, 29–67, 1)
In a vision an apostolic person saw people who were locked up in a house of
fire, bound with [chains] of fire, and thrown [into]…fire [on account of…false]
faith. It was said, “[They might have] saved [their souls], but they did not want
to, so they got [this place of] punishment called the [outer] darkness….”
Water and Fire (67, 2–9)
Soul and spirit have come into being from water and fire. The attendant of the
bridal chamber has come into being from water, fire, and light. Fire is chrism.
Light is fire. I do not mean ordinary fire, which has no form, but other fire,
which is pure white in appearance, beautifully bright and imparting beauty.

Truth and Nakedness (67, 9–27)
Truth did not come into the world naked, but in symbols and images. The world
cannot receive truth in any other way. There is rebirth and an image of rebirth,
and it is by means of this image that one must be reborn. What image is this? It
is resurrection. Image must arise through image. By means of this image the
bridal chamber and the image must approach the truth. This is restoration.
Those who receive the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit and have
accepted them must do this. If someone does not accept them, the name will
also be taken from that person. A person receives them in the chrism with the oil
of the power of the cross. The apostles called this power the right and the left.
This person is no longer a Christian but is Christ.
Sacraments (67, 27–30)
The master [did] everything in a mystery: baptism, chrism, eucharist,
redemption, and bridal chamber.
The Inner and the Outer (67, 30–68, 17))
[For this reason] he said, “I have come to make [the lower] like the [upper and
the] outer like the [inner, and to unite] them in that place.” [He spoke] here in
symbols [and images].
Those who say [there is a heavenly person and] one that is higher are
wrong, for they call the visible heavenly person “lower” and the one to
whom the hidden realm belongs “higher.” It would be better for them to speak of
the inner, the outer, and the outermost. For the master called corruption “the
outermost darkness,” and there is nothing outside it. He said, “My Father who
is in secret.” He said, “Go into your room, shut the door behind you, and pray to
your Father who is in secret,” that is, the one who is innermost. What is
innermost is the Fullness, and there is nothing further within. And this is what
they call uppermost.
Fall and Return to Fullness (68, 17–22)
Before Christ some came from a realm they could not reenter, and they went to a
place they could not yet leave. Then Christ came. Those who went in he brought
out, and those who went out he brought in.
When Eve Was in Adam (68, 22–26)

When Eve was in Adam, there was no death. When she was separated from him,
death came. If <she> enters into him again and he embraces <her>, death will
cease to be.
Why Have You Forsaken Me? (68, 26–29)
“My God, my God, why, Lord, have you forsaken me?” He spoke these words
on the cross, for he had left that place.
True Flesh (68, 29–37)
[The master] was conceived from what [is imperishable], through God. The
[master rose] from the dead, but [he did not come into being as he] was. Rather,
his [body] was [completely] perfect. [It was] of flesh, and this [flesh] was true
flesh. [Our flesh] is not true flesh, but only an image of the true.
The Wedding Chamber (69, 1–4)
Animals do not have a wedding chamber, nor do slaves or defiled women. The
wedding chamber is for free men and virgins.
Baptism (69, 4–14)
We are born again through the Holy Spirit, and we are conceived through Christ
in baptism with two elements. We are anointed through the Spirit, and when we
were conceived, we were united.
No one can see oneself in the water or in a mirror without light, nor can you
see yourself in the light without water or a mirror. So it is necessary to baptize
with two elements, light and water, and light is chrism.
The Temple in Jerusalem (69, 14–70, 4)
There were three structures for sacrifice in Jerusalem. One opened to the west
and was called the holy place; a second opened to the south and was called the
holy of the holy; the third opened to the east and was called the holy of holies,
where only the high priest could enter. The holy place is baptism; the holy of the
holy is redemption; the holy of holies is the bridal chamber. Baptism entails
resurrection and redemption, and redemption is in the bridal chamber. The bridal
chamber is within a realm superior to [what we belong to], and you cannot find
anything [like it…. These] are the ones who worship [in spirit and in truth, for

they do not worship] in Jerusalem. There are people in Jerusalem who [do
worship] in Jerusalem, and they await [the mysteries] called [the holy] of holies,
the curtain [of which] was torn. [Our] bridal chamber is the image [of the bridal
chamber] above. That is why its curtain was torn from top to bottom, for
some people from below had to go up.
Wearing the Light (70, 5–9)
The powers cannot see those who have put on the perfect light, and they cannot
seize them. One puts on the light in the mystery of union.
Union in the Bridal Chamber (70, 9–22)
If the female had not separated from the male, the female and the male would
not have died. The separation of male and female was the beginning of death.
Christ came to heal the separation that was from the beginning and reunite the
two, in order to give life to those who died through separation and unite them.
A woman is united with her husband in the bridal chamber, and those united
in the bridal chamber will not be separated again. That is why Eve became
separated from Adam, because she had not united with him in the bridal
chamber.
Adam’s Soul (70, 22–34)
Adam’s soul came from a breath. The soul’s companion is spirit, and the spirit
given to him is his mother. His soul was [taken] from him and replaced with
[spirit]. When he was united with spirit, [he] uttered words superior to the
powers, and the powers envied him. They [separated him from his] spiritual
companion…hidden…bridal chamber….
Jesus at the Jordan (70, 34–71, 3)
Jesus revealed himself [at the] Jordan River as the fullness of heaven’s kingdom.
The one [conceived] before all was conceived again; the one anointed
before was anointed again; the one redeemed redeemed others.
The Mystery of the Virgin Birth (71, 3–15)
It is necessary to utter a mystery. The Father of the All united with the virgin
who came down, and fire shone on him.

On that day that one revealed the great bridal chamber, and in this way his
body came into being.
On that day he came forth from the bridal chamber as one born of a
bridegroom and a bride.
So Jesus established all within it, and it is fitting for each of the disciples to
enter into his rest.
The Births of Adam and Christ (71, 16–21)
Adam came from two virgins, the Spirit and the virgin earth. Christ was born of
a virgin to correct the fall that occurred in the beginning.
Two Trees in Paradise (71, 22–72, 4)
There are two trees growing in paradise. One produces [animals] and the other
produces people. Adam [ate] of the tree that produces animals, and [he] became
an animal and brought forth animals. As a result Adam’s children worship
animals. The tree [whose] fruit [he ate] is the [tree of knowledge, and because
of this, sins] increased. [If he had] eaten the [fruit of the other tree], the fruit of
[the tree of life, which] produces people, [gods would] worship people. As [in
paradise] God created people [that people] might create God, so also in
this world people make gods and worship what they have created. It would be
more fitting for gods to worship people.
Accomplishments (72, 4–17)
The truth is, a person’s accomplishments depend on that person’s abilities, and
for this reason we refer to accomplishments as abilities. Among such
accomplishments are a person’s children, and they come into being from a time
of rest. Now, one’s abilities come to expression in what one accomplishes, and
rest is clearly found in children. You will find this also applies to the image.
These are the people made after the image, who accomplish things through
their strength and bring forth children through rest.
Slaves and the Free (72, 17–29)
In this world slaves serve the free. In heaven’s kingdom the free will serve the
slaves and the attendants of the bridal chamber will serve the wedding guests.
The attendants of the bridal chamber have only one name, and that is rest.
When they are together, they need no other form, [for they are in]

contemplation…perception. They are superior…among those in…the glories of
glories….
Jesus Going Down into the Water (72, 29–73, 1)
[It] was [necessary for Jesus] to go down into the water [in order to perfect] and
purify it. [So also] those who are [baptized] in his name [are perfected]. For he
said, “[Thus] shall we perfect all righteousness.”
Resurrection and Baptism (73, 1–8)
People who say they will first die and then arise are wrong. If they do not
receive the resurrection first, while they are alive, they will receive nothing when
they die. So it is said of baptism, “Great is baptism,” for if people receive it, they
will live.
Joseph the Carpenter (73, 8–19)
Philip the apostle said, “Joseph the carpenter planted a garden, for he needed
wood for his trade. He is the one who made the cross from the trees he planted,
and his own offspring hung on what he planted. His offspring was Jesus and
what he planted was the cross.”
The tree of life, however, is in the middle of the garden. It is an olive tree,
and from it comes chrism, and from chrism comes resurrection.
This World Eats Corpses (73, 19–27)
This world eats corpses, and everything eaten in this world also dies. Truth eats
life, and no one nourished by [truth] will die. Jesus came from that realm and
brought food from there, and he gave [life] to all who wanted it, that they might
not die.
God Plants Paradise (73, 27–74, 12)
[God planted] a garden, and humans [lived in the] garden. There are some [who
dwell] with…God….
This garden [is where] it will be said to me, “…[eat] this and do not eat that,
[as you] wish.” This is where I shall eat everything, where the tree of
knowledge is.
That tree killed Adam, but here the tree of knowledge has brought people

back to life. That tree was the law. It can give knowledge of good and evil, but it
neither freed Adam from evil nor made him good, and it brought death to those
who ate of it. For when it was said, “Eat this and do not eat that,” death began.
Chrism Is Superior to Baptism (74, 12–24)
Chrism is superior to baptism. We are called Christians from the word “chrism,”
not from the word “baptism.” Christ also has his name from chrism, for the
Father anointed the Son, the Son anointed the apostles, and the apostles anointed
us. Whoever is anointed has everything: resurrection, light, cross, Holy Spirit.
The Father gave all this to the person in the bridal chamber, and the person
accepted it. The Father was in the Son and the Son was in the Father. This is
heaven’s kingdom.
Laughing (74, 24–75, 2)
The master put it very well: “Some have gone into heaven’s kingdom laughing,
and they have come out [laughing].”
Someone said, “[That is] a Christian.”
The person said [again, “That is the one who went] down into the water and
came [up as lord] of all. [Redemption is no] laughing matter, but [a person goes
laughing into] heaven’s kingdom out of contempt for these rags. If the person
despises [the body] and considers it a laughing matter, [the person will come out]
laughing.”
So it is also with bread, the cup, and oil, though there are mysteries
higher than these.
Creation Through a Mistake (75, 2–14)
The world came into being through a mistake. The creator wanted to make it
incorruptible and immortal, but he failed and did not get what he hoped for. For
the world is not incorruptible and the creator of the world is not incorruptible.
Things are not incorruptible, but offspring are. Nothing can receive
incorruptibility unless it is an offspring. And whatever cannot receive certainly
cannot give.
Eucharist and Baptism (75, 14–25)
The cup of prayer contains wine and water, for it represents the blood for
which thanksgiving is offered. It is full of the Holy Spirit, and it belongs to the

completely perfect human. When we drink it, we take to ourselves the perfect
human.
The living water is a body, and we must put on the living human. Thus, when
one is about to go down into the water, one strips in order to put on the living
human.
Like Bring Forth Like (75, 25–76, 6)
A horse brings forth a horse, a human brings forth humans, a deity brings forth
deities. So also bridegrooms and brides come from the [bridegroom and bride].
No Jews…from Greeks…from Jews…to Christians. [There was another
generation of people], and these [blessed people] were called the chosen spiritual
ones, true humanity, the child of humanity, and the offspring of the child of
humanity. This true generation is renowned in the world, and this is where the
attendants of the bridal chamber are.
Strength and Weakness (76, 6–17)
In this world, where strength and weakness are to be found, there is union of
male and female, but in the eternal realm there is a different kind of union.
Although we refer to these things with the same words, there are also other
words that are superior to every word that is pronounced.
These are above strength. For there is strength and there are those superior to
strength, and they are not different but the same. This is incomprehensible to
hearts of flesh.
Know Yourself (76, 17–22)
All those who have everything should know themselves, shouldn’t they? If
some do not know themselves, they will not enjoy what they have, but those who
know themselves will enjoy their possessions.
Putting on Light (76, 22–77, 1)
The perfect human can neither be grasped nor seen. What is seen can be grasped.
No one can obtain this grace without putting on perfect light and becoming
perfect light. Whoever puts on light will enter [the place of rest]. This is perfect
[light, and] we [must] become [perfect humans] before we leave [the world].
Whoever obtains everything [but does not separate] from this world will [not] be
able [to attain] that realm but will [go to the] middle place, for that one is not

perfect. Only Jesus knows the fate of that person.
The Priest (77, 2–7)
The holy person is completely holy, including the person’s body. The holy
person who takes up bread consecrates it, and does the same with the cup or
anything else the person takes up and consecrates. So how wouldn’t the person
consecrate the body also?
The Water of Baptism and Death (77, 7–15)
As Jesus perfected the water of baptism, he poured death out. For this reason
we go down into the water but not into death, that we may not be poured out into
the spirit of the world. When it blows, winter comes. When the Holy Spirit
blows, summer comes.
Knowledge and Love (77, 15–35)
Whoever knows the truth is free, and a free person does not sin, for “one
who sins is a slave of sin.” Truth is the Mother, knowledge is the Father. Those
who do not allow themselves to sin the world calls free. They do not allow
themselves to sin, and knowledge of the truth lifts them up118—that is, it makes
them free and superior to all. But “love builds up.” Whoever is free through
knowledge is a slave because of love for those who do not yet have freedom of
knowledge. Knowledge enables them to be free.
Love [never says] it owns something, [though] it owns [everything]. Love
does not [say, “This is mine]” or “That is mine,” but rather, “[All that is mine] is
yours.”
Spiritual Love (77, 35–78, 12)
Spiritual love is wine and perfume. People who anoint themselves with it
enjoy it, and while these people are present, others who are around also enjoy it.
If the people who are anointed leave them and go away, the others who are not
anointed but are only standing around are stuck with their own bad odor.
The Samaritan gave nothing to the wounded person except wine and oil—
that is, only ointment. The ointment healed the wound, for “love covers a
multitude of sins.”

Children and Love (78, 12–25)
The children a woman brings forth resemble the man she loves. If it is her
husband, they resemble her husband. If it is a lover, they resemble the lover.
Often, if a woman must sleep with her husband but her heart is with the lover
with whom she usually has sex, the child she bears will resemble the lover.
So, you who live with the Son of God, do not love the world but love the
master, that what you bring forth may not resemble the world, but may
resemble the master.
Sex and Spirit (78, 25–79, 13)
Humans have sex with humans, horses have sex with horses, donkeys have sex
with donkeys. Members of a species have sex with members of the same species.
So also spirit has intercourse with spirit, word mingles with word, light
mingles [with light].
If [you] become human,
[a human] will love you.
If you become [spirit],
spirit will unite with you.
If you become word,
word will have intercourse with you.
If you become light,
light will mingle with you.
If you become one of those above,
those above will rest on you.
If you become a horse or donkey or bull
or dog or sheep or some other animal,
wild or tame,
then neither human nor spirit
nor word nor light can love you.
Those above and those within cannot rest in you,
and you have no part in them.
Slave and Free (79, 13–18)
People who are slaves against their will can be free. People who are freed by
favor of their master and then sell themselves back into slavery cannot be free
again.

Farming (79, 18–32)
Farming in this world depends on four things, and a harvest is gathered and
taken into the barn as a result of water, earth, air, and light.
God’s farming also depends on four things: faith, hope, love, and
knowledge. Faith is the earth in which we take root. Hope is the water with
which we are nourished. Love is the air through which we grow. Knowledge is
the light by which we [ripen].
Grace exists [in four ways. It is] earthly; it is [heavenly]…the highest
heaven….
Blessed Is One Who Never Grieves Anyone (79, 32–80, 23)
[Blessed] is one who has never grieved a soul. This is Jesus Christ. He came
to the whole earth and never laid a burden upon anyone. Blessed is one like this,
for this is a perfect human.
The word tells us how difficult it is to bring this about. How can we
accomplish such a feat? How can we give help to everyone?
To begin with, one must not cause grief to anyone, whether great or small,
unbeliever or believer, and one must not give help to those who are well off.
There are some who profit by helping the rich. The person who does good deeds
will not help the rich, for this person will not take just anything that may be
desirable. Nor can such a person cause them grief, since this person does not
give them trouble. The new rich sometimes cause others grief, but the person
who does good deeds does not do this. It is the wickedness of these people that
causes their grief. The person with the nature of a perfect human gives joy to the
good, but some people are deeply distressed by all this.
A Householder and Food (80, 23–81, 14)
There was a householder who had everything: children, slaves, cattle, dogs, pigs,
wheat, barley, chaff, fodder, [oil], meat, and acorns. The householder was wise
and knew the food of each. He fed the children [baked] bread [and meat]. He fed
the slaves [oil and] grain. [He fed] the cattle barley, chaff, and fodder. He threw
the dogs some bones. He fed the pigs acorns and gruel.
So it is with the disciples of God. If they are wise, they understand discipleship. Bodily forms will not deceive them, but they will examine the condition of
each person’s soul and speak appropriately with the person. In the world many
animals have human form. If the disciples of God identify them as pigs, they
feed them acorns. If cattle, they feed them barley, chaff, and fodder. If dogs, they

throw them some bones. If slaves, they feed them what is preliminary. If
children, they feed them what is complete.
Creating and Procreating (81, 14–34)
There is the Child of Humanity, and there is the child of the Child of Humanity.
The Child of Humanity is the Lord, and the child of the Child of Humanity is the
one who creates through the Child of Humanity. The Child of Humanity received
from God the ability to create. He can also procreate. One who has received the
ability to create is a creature, and one who has received the ability to procreate is
an offspring. One who creates cannot procreate, but one who procreates can
create. One who creates is said to procreate, but the “offspring” are really
creatures, because these “offspring” are not children of procreation but [works of
creation].
One who creates works openly and is visible. One who procreates does so
[secretly] and is hidden, for one who procreates [is beyond every] image. So,
then, one who creates does so openly, and one who procreates [produces]
offspring secretly.
Pure Marriage (81, 34–82, 26)
No [one can] know when [a husband] and wife have sex except those two,
for marriage in this world is a mystery for those married. If defiled marriage is
hidden, how much more is undefiled marriage a true mystery! It is not fleshly
but pure. It belongs not to desire but to will. It belongs not to darkness or night
but to the day and the light.
If marriage is exposed, it has become prostitution, and the bride plays the
harlot not only if she is impregnated by another man, but even if she slips out of
her bedchamber and is seen. Let her show herself only to her father and her
mother, the friend of the bridegroom, and the attendants of the bridegroom. They
are allowed to enter the bridal chamber every day. But let the others yearn just to
hear her voice and enjoy the fragrance of her ointment, and let them feed on the
crumbs that fall from the table, like dogs.
Bridegrooms and brides belong to the bridal chamber. No one can see a
bridegroom or a bride except by becoming one.
Abraham’s Circumcision (82, 26–29)
When Abraham [was able] to see what he was to see, [he] circumcised the

flesh of the foreskin, thus teaching us that it is necessary to destroy the flesh.
Hidden Parts (82, 30–83, 18)
As long as their [insides] are hidden, [most] beings in the world are alive and
well. [If their insides] are exposed, they die, as is clear by the example of the
visible part of a person. [As long as] a person’s intestines are hidden, the person
is alive. If the intestines are exposed and come out, the person dies.
Likewise, while its root is hidden, a tree sprouts and grows. If its root is exposed,
the tree withers.
So it is with all things produced in the world, not only the visible but also the
hidden. As long as the root of evil is hidden, it is strong. When it is recognized,
it is undone, and if it is brought to light, it dies. For this reason the word says,
“Already the ax is laid at the root of the trees.” It will not merely cut them
down, for what is cut down sprouts up again. Rather, the ax will dig down until it
cuts out the root. Jesus pulled out the root of the whole place, but others did so
only in part.
The Root of Evil (83, 18–30)
Let each of us also dig down after the root of evil within us and pull it out of our
hearts from the root. It will be uprooted if we recognize it. But if we are ignorant
of it, it takes root in us and produces fruit in our hearts. It dominates us. We are
its slaves, and it takes us captive so that we do what we do [not] want and do
[not] do what we want. It is powerful because we do not recognize it. As long as
[it] exists, it stays active.
Ignorance Is the Mother of Evil (83, 30–84, 14)
Ignorance is the mother of [all evil]. Ignorance leads to [death, because] those
who come from [ignorance] neither were nor [are] nor will be. [But those in the
truth] will be perfect when all truth is revealed. For truth is like ignorance.
While hidden, truth rests in itself, but when revealed and recognized, truth is
praised in that it is stronger than ignorance and error. It gives freedom.
The word says, “If you know the truth, the truth will make you free.”
Ignorance is a slave, knowledge is freedom. If we know the truth, we shall
find the fruit of truth within us. If we join with it, it will bring us fulfillment.
Things Visible and Hidden (84, 14–20)

At present we encounter the visible things of creation, and we say that they are
mighty and worthy and the hidden things are weak and insignificant. It is
<not> so with the visible things of truth. They are weak and insignificant, but
the hidden things are mighty and worthy.
Temple, Cross, Ark (84, 20–85, 21)
The mysteries of truth are made known in symbols and images. The bedchamber
is hidden, and it is the holy of the holy. At first the curtain concealed how God
manages creation, but when the curtain is torn and what is inside appears, this
building will be left deserted, or rather will be destroyed. And the whole
godhead will flee from here but not into the holy of holies, for it cannot mingle
with pure [light] and [perfect] fullness. Instead, it will remain under the wings of
the cross [and under] its arms. This ark will be salvation [for people] when
floodwaters surge over them.
Whoever belongs to the priestly order can go inside the curtain along with
the high priest. For this reason the curtain was not torn only at the top, for then
only the upper realm would have been opened. It was not torn only at the
bottom, for then it would have revealed only the lower realm. No, it was torn
from top to bottom. The upper realm was opened for us in the lower realm,
that we might enter the hidden realm of truth. This is what is truly worthy and
mighty, and we shall enter through symbols that are weak and insignificant.
They are weak compared to perfect glory. There is glory that surpasses glory,
there is power that surpasses power. Perfect things have opened to us, and
hidden things of truth. The holy of holies was revealed, and the bedchamber
invited us in.
Revelation of the Seed (85, 21–32)
As long as the seed of the Holy Spirit is hidden, wickedness is ineffective,
though it is not yet removed from the midst of the seed, and they are still
enslaved to evil. But when the seed is revealed, then perfect light will shine on
everyone, and all who are in the light will [receive the] chrism. Then slaves
will be freed and captives ransomed. “Every plant that my Father in heaven has
not planted [will be] pulled out.” What is separated will be united, [what is
empty] will be filled.
Eternal Light (85, 32–86, 19)

Everyone who [enters] the bedchamber will kindle the [light. This is] like
marriages that occur [in secret and] take place at night. The light of the fire
[shines] during the night and then goes out. The mysteries of that marriage,
however, are performed in the day and the light, and neither that day nor its light
ever sets.
If someone becomes an attendant of the bridal chamber, that person will
receive the light. If one does not receive it while here in this place, one cannot
receive it in the other place.
Those who receive the light cannot be seen or grasped. Nothing can trouble
such people even while they are living in this world. And when they leave this
world, they have already received truth through images, and the world has
become the eternal realm. To these people the eternal realm is Fullness.
This is the way it is. It is revealed to such a person alone, hidden not in
darkness and night but hidden in perfect day and holy light.
The Gospel According to Philip
