The Secret Book of John
The Teaching of the Savior (1, 1–4)
The teaching of the Savior, and [the revelation] of the mysteries [and the things]
hidden in silence, things he taught his disciple John.
The Revealer Appears to John (1, 5–2, 25)
One day when John the brother of James, who are the sons of Zebedee, went up
to the temple, it happened that a Pharisee named Arimanios came up to him and
said to him, “Where is your teacher, whom you followed?”
I said to him, “He has returned to the place he came from.”
The Pharisee said to me, “This Nazarene really has deceived you, filled your
ears with lies, closed [your minds], and turned you from the traditions of your
ancestors.”
When I, John, heard this, I turned away from the temple and went to a
mountainous and barren place. I was distressed within, and I asked how the
Savior was chosen:
Why was he sent into the world by his Father?
Who is his Father who sent him?
To what kind of eternal realm shall we go?
And why did he tell us, when he spoke,
that this eternal realm [to which we shall go]
is modeled after the incorruptible realm,
but he did not teach us what kind of aeon that one is?
At the moment I was thinking about this, look, the heavens opened, all
creation under heaven lit up, and the world shook.  I was afraid, and look, I
saw within the light [someone standing] by me. As I was looking, it seemed to
be an elderly person. Again it changed its appearance to be a youth. Not that
there were several figures before me. Rather, there was a figure with several
forms within the light. These forms were visible through each other, and the
figure had three forms.
The figure said to me, “John, John, why are you doubting? Why are you
afraid? Aren’t you familiar with this figure? Then do not be fainthearted. I am
with you always. I am [the Father], I am the Mother, I am the Child. I am the
incorruptible and the undefiled one. [Now I have come] to teach you what is,
what [was], and what is going to come, that you may [understand] what is
invisible and what is visible; and to teach you about the [unshakable generation
of] the perfect [human]. So now, lift up your [head] that you may [hear] the
things I shall tell you today, and that you may relate them to your spiritual
friends who are from the unshakable generation of the perfect human.”
The One (2, 25–4, 19)
I asked if I might understand this, and it said to me, The One is a sovereign that
has nothing over it. It is God and Parent, Father of the All, the invisible one that
is over the All, that is incorruptible, that is pure light at which no eye can gaze.
The One is the Invisible Spirit. We should not think of it as a god or like a
god. For it is greater than a god, because it has nothing over it and no  lord
above it. It does not [exist] within anything inferior [to it, since everything]
exists within it, [for it established] itself. It is eternal, since it does not need
anything. For it is absolutely complete. It has never lacked anything in order to
be completed by it. Rather, it is always absolutely complete in light.
The One is
illimitable, since there is nothing before it to limit it,
unfathomable, since there is nothing before it to fathom it,
immeasurable, since there was nothing before it to measure it,
invisible, since nothing has seen it,
eternal, since it exists eternally,
unutterable, since nothing could comprehend it to utter it,
unnamable, since there is nothing before it to give it a name.
The One is the immeasurable light, pure, holy, immaculate. It is unutterable,
and is perfect in incorruptibility. Not that it is just perfection, or blessedness, or
divinity: it is much greater.
The One is not corporeal and it is not incorporeal.
The One is not large and it is not small.
It is impossible to say,
How much is it?
What [kind is it]?
For no one can understand it.
The One is not among the things that exist, but it is much greater. Not that it
is greater. Rather, as it is in itself, it is not a part of the aeons or time. For
whatever is part of a realm was once prepared by another. Time was not allotted
to it, since it receives nothing from anyone: what would be received would be on
loan. The one who is first does not need to receive anything from another. It
beholds itself in  its light.
The One is majestic and has an immeasurable purity.
The One is a realm that gives a realm,
life that gives life,
a blessed one that gives blessedness,
knowledge that gives knowledge,
a good one that gives goodness,
mercy that gives mercy and redemption,
grace that gives grace.
Not that the One possesses this. Rather, the One gives immeasurable and
incomprehensible light.
What shall I tell you about it? Its eternal realm is incorruptible, at peace,
dwelling in silence, at rest, before everything.
It is the head of all realms, and it is the one who sustains them through its
goodness.
We would not know [what is ineffable], we would not understand what is
immeasurable, were it not for the one who has come from the Father. This is the
one who has told these things to us [alone].
Barbelo Appears (4, 19–6, 10)
This Father is the one who beholds himself in the light surrounding him, which
is the spring of living water and provides all the realms. He reflects on his image
everywhere, sees it in the spring of the Spirit, and becomes enamored of his
luminous water, [for his image is in] the spring of pure luminous water
surrounding him.
His thought became a reality, and she who appeared in his presence in
shining light came forth. She is the first power who preceded everything and
came forth from his mind as the Forethought of the All. Her light shines like
the Father’s light; she, the perfect power, is the image of the Perfect and
Invisible Virgin Spirit.
She, [the first] power, the glory of Barbelo, the perfect  glory among the
aeons, the glory of revelation, she glorified and praised the Virgin Spirit, for
because of the Spirit she had come forth.
She is the first Thought, the image of the Spirit. She became the universal
womb, for she precedes everything,
the Mother-Father,
the first Human,
the holy Spirit,
the triple male,
the triple power,
the androgynous one with three names,
the aeon among the invisible beings,
the first to come forth.
Barbelo asked the Invisible Virgin Spirit to give her Foreknowledge, and the
Spirit consented. When the Spirit consented, Foreknowledge appeared and
stood by Forethought. This is the one who came from the Thought of the
Invisible Virgin Spirit. Foreknowledge glorified the Spirit and the Spirit’s
perfect power, Barbelo, for because of her Foreknowledge had come into being.
She asked again to be given Incorruptibility, and the Spirit consented. When
the Spirit consented, Incorruptibility appeared and stood by Thought and
Foreknowledge. Incorruptibility glorified the invisible one and Barbelo. Because
of her they had come into being.
Barbelo asked to be given Life Eternal, and the Invisible Spirit consented.
When the Spirit consented, Life Eternal appeared, and they stood together and
glorified the Invisible Spirit and Barbelo. Because of her they had come into
being.
She asked again to be given Truth, and the Invisible Spirit consented. Truth
appeared, and they stood together and glorified the good Invisible  Spirit and
its Barbelo. Because of her they had come into being.
These are the five aeons of the Father. They are:
the first human, the image of the Invisible Spirit, that is,
Forethought, which is Barbelo, and Thought,
along with Foreknowledge,
Incorruptibility,
Life Eternal
and Truth.
These are the five androgynous aeons, which are the ten aeons, which is the
Father.
Barbelo Conceives (6, 10–7, 30)
The Father gazed into Barbelo, with the pure light surrounding the Invisible
Spirit, and his radiance. Barbelo conceived from him, and he produced a spark of
light similar to the blessed light but not as great. This was the only Child of the
Mother-Father that had come forth, the only offspring, the only Child of the
Father, the pure light. The Invisible Virgin Spirit rejoiced over the light that
was produced, that came forth from the first power of the Spirit’s Forethought,
who is Barbelo. The Spirit anointed it with his own goodness until it was
perfect, with no lack of goodness, since it was anointed with the goodness of the
Invisible Spirit. The Child stood in the presence of the Spirit as the Spirit
anointed the Child. As soon as the Child received this from the Spirit, it
glorified the holy Spirit and perfect Forethought. Because of her it had come
forth.
The Child asked to be given Mind as a companion to work with, and the
Spirit consented. When the Invisible Spirit consented,  Mind appeared and
stood by the anointed, and glorified the Spirit and Barbelo.
All these beings came into existence in silence.
Mind wished to create something by means of the word of the Invisible
Spirit. Its Will became a reality and appeared, with Mind and the light,
glorifying it. Word followed Will. For the anointed, the divine Self-Generated,
created everything by the Word. Life Eternal, Will, Mind, and Foreknowledge
stood together and glorified the Invisible Spirit and Barbelo, for because of her
they had come into being.
The holy Spirit brought the divine Self-Generated Child of himself and
Barbelo to perfection, so that the Child might stand before the great Invisible
Virgin Spirit as the divine Self-Generated, the anointed, who honored the Spirit
with loud acclaim. The Child came forth through Forethought. The Invisible
Virgin Spirit set the true, divine Self-Generated over everything and caused all
authority and the truth within to be subject to it, so that the Child might
understand everything, the one called by a name greater than every name, for
that name will be told to those who are worthy of it.
The Four Luminaries (7, 30–8, 28)
Now from the light, which is the anointed, and from Incorruptibility, by the
grace of the Spirit, the Four Luminaries that derive from the divine SelfGenerated gazed out in order to stand  before it. The three beings are:
will,
thought,
life.
The four powers are:
understanding,
grace,
perception,
thoughtfulness.
Grace dwells in the eternal realm of the luminary Harmozel, who is the first
angel. There are three other aeons with this eternal realm:
grace,
truth,
form.
The second luminary is Oroiael, who has been appointed over the second
eternal realm. There are three other aeons with it:
Insight,
perception,
memory.
The third luminary is Daveithai, who has been appointed over the third
eternal realm. There are three other aeons with it:
understanding,
love,
idea.
The fourth eternal realm has been set up for the fourth luminary, Eleleth.
There are three other aeons with it:
perfection,
peace,
Sophia.
These are the Four Luminaries that stand before the divine Self-Generated;
these are the twelve aeons that stand before the Child of the Great One, the SelfGenerated, the anointed, by the will and grace of the Invisible Spirit. The twelve
aeons belong to the Child, the Self-Generated, and everything was established by
the will of the holy Spirit through the Self-Generated.
Pigeradamas and Seth (8, 28–9, 24)
From the Foreknowledge of the perfect Mind, through the expressed will of the
Invisible Spirit and the will of the Self-Generated, came the perfect human, the
first revelation, the truth. The Virgin Spirit named the human Pigeradamas, and
appointed him to  the first eternal realm with the great Self-Generated, the
anointed, by the first luminary, Harmozel. Its powers dwell with it. The invisible
one gave him an invincible power of mind.
Pigeradamas spoke and glorified and praised the Invisible Spirit by saying,
Because of you everything has come into being,
and to you everything will return.
I shall praise and glorify you,
the Self-Generated,
the eternal realms,
the three, Father, Mother, Child,
perfect power.
He appointed his son Seth to the second eternal realm, before the second
luminary, Oroiael.
In the third eternal realm were stationed the offspring of Seth, with the third
luminary, Daveithai. The souls of the saints were stationed there.
In the fourth eternal realm were stationed the souls of those who were
ignorant of the Fullness. They did not repent immediately, but held out for a
while and repented later. They came to be with the fourth luminary, Eleleth.
These are creatures that glorify the Invisible Spirit.
The Fall of Sophia (9, 25–10, 19)
Now, Sophia, who is the Wisdom of Insight and who constitutes an aeon,
conceived of a thought from herself, with the conception of the Invisible Spirit
and Foreknowledge. She wanted to bring forth something like herself, without
the consent of the Spirit, who had not given approval, without her partner and
without his consideration. The male did not give approval. She did not find her
partner, and she considered this without the Spirit’s consent and without the
knowledge of her partner. Nonetheless, she gave birth.  And because of the
invincible power within her, her thought was not an idle thought. Something
came out of her that was imperfect and different in appearance from her, for she
had produced it without her partner. It did not resemble its mother and was
misshapen.
When Sophia saw what her desire had produced, it changed into the figure of
a snake with the face of a lion. Its eyes were like flashing bolts of lightning.
She cast it away from her, outside that realm so that none of the immortals would
see it. She had produced it ignorantly.
She surrounded it with a bright cloud and put a throne in the middle of the
cloud so that no one would see it except the holy Spirit, who is called the Mother
of the living. She named her offspring Yaldabaoth.
Yaldabaoth’s World Order (10, 19–13, 13)
This is the first ruler, the archon who took great power from his mother. Then he
left her and moved away from the place where he was born. He took control and
created for himself other aeons with luminous fire, which still exists. He mated
with the mindlessness in him and produced authorities for himself:
The name of the first is Athoth, whom generations call the [reaper].
The second is Harmas, who is the jealous eye.
The third is Kalila-Oumbri.
The fourth is Yabel.
The fifth is Adonaios, who is called Sabaoth.
The sixth is Cain, whom generations of people call the sun.
The seventh is Abel.
The eighth is Abrisene.
The ninth is Yobel.
The tenth is Armoupieel.
The eleventh is Melcheir-Adonein.
The twelfth is Belias, who is over the depth of the underworld.
Yaldabaoth stationed seven kings, one for each sphere of heaven, to reign
over the seven heavens, and five to reign over the depth of the abyss. He shared
his fire with them, but he did not give away any of the power of the light he had
taken from his mother. For he is ignorant darkness.
When light mixed with darkness, it made the darkness shine. When darkness
mixed with light, it dimmed the light, and it became neither light nor darkness,
but rather gloom.
This gloomy archon has three names: the first name is Yaldabaoth, the
second is Sakla, the third is Samael.
He is wicked in the mindlessness within him. He said, “I am God and there is
no other god beside me,” since he did not know from where his own strength
had come.
The rulers each created seven powers for themselves, and the powers each
created six angels, until there were 365 angels. These are the names and the
corresponding physiques:
The first is Athoth, and has the face of a sheep.
The second is Eloaios, and has the face of a donkey.
The third is Astaphaios, and has the face of a hyena.
The fourth is Yao, and has the face of a snake with seven heads.
The fifth is Sabaoth, and has the face of a snake.
The sixth is Adonin, and has the face of an ape.
The seventh is Sabbataios, and has a face of flaming fire.
This is the sevenfold nature of the week.
Yaldabaoth has many  faces, more than all of these, so that he could
show whatever face he wanted when he was among the seraphim. He shared
his fire with them, and lorded it over them because of the glorious power he had
from his mother’s light. That is why he called himself God and defied the place
from which he came.
In his thought he united the seven powers with the authorities that were with
him. When he spoke, it was done. He named each of the powers, beginning with
the highest:
First is goodness, with the first power, Athoth.
Second is forethought, with the second power, Eloaios.
Third is divinity, with the third power, Astaphaios.
Fourth is lordship, with the fourth power, Yao.
Fifth is kingdom, with the fifth power, Sabaoth.
Sixth is jealousy, with the sixth power, Adonin.
Seventh is understanding, with the seventh power, Sabbataios.
Each has a sphere in its own realm.
They were named after the glory above for the destruction of the powers.
Although the names given them by their maker were powerful, the names given
them after the glory above would bring about their destruction and loss of power.
That is why they have two names.
Yaldabaoth organized everything after the pattern of the first aeons that had
come into being, so that he might  create everything in an incorruptible
form. Not that he had seen the incorruptible ones. Rather, the power that is in
him, that he had taken from his mother, produced in him the pattern for the
world order.
When he saw creation surrounding him, and the throng of angels around him
that had come forth from him, he said to them, “I am a jealous god and there is
no other god beside me.”
But by announcing this, he suggested to the angels with him that there is
another god. For if there were no other god, of whom would he be jealous?
Sophia Repents (13, 13–14, 13)
Then the Mother began to move around. She realized that she was lacking
something when the brightness of her light diminished. She grew dim because
her partner had not collaborated with her.
I said, “Lord, what does it mean that she moved around?”
The Lord laughed and said, Do not suppose that it is as Moses said, above
the waters. No, when she recognized the wickedness that had taken place and
the robbery her son had committed, she repented. When she became forgetful in
the darkness of ignorance, she began to be ashamed. She did not dare to return,
but she was agitated. This agitation is the moving around.
The arrogant one took power from his mother. He was ignorant, for he
thought no one existed except his mother alone. When he saw the throng of
angels he had created, he exalted himself over them.
When the Mother realized that the trappings of darkness had come into
being imperfectly, she understood that her partner had not collaborated with her.
She repented  with many tears. The whole realm of Fullness heard her prayer
of repentance and offered praise on her behalf to the Invisible Virgin Spirit, and
the Spirit consented. When the Invisible Spirit consented, the holy Spirit
poured upon her some of the fullness of all. For her partner did not come to her
on his own, but he came to her through the realm of Fullness, so that he might
restore what she lacked. She was taken up not to her own eternal realm, but
instead to a position above her son. She was to remain in the ninth heaven until
she restored what was lacking in herself.
The Human Appears (14, 13–34)
A voice called from the exalted heavenly realm,
Humanity exists and the Child of Humanity.
The first ruler, Yaldabaoth, heard the voice and thought it had come from his
mother. He did not realize its source.
The holy perfect Mother-Father,
the complete Forethought,
the image of the invisible one,
being the Father of the All,
through whom everything came into being,
the first human—
this is the one who showed them and appeared in human shape.
The entire realm of the first ruler quaked, and the foundations of the abyss
shook. The bottom side of the waters above the material world was lit up by this
image that had appeared. When all the authorities and the first ruler stared at this
appearance, they saw the whole bottom side as it was lit up. And through the
light they saw the shape of the image in the water.
The Creation of Adam (15, 1–19, 10)
Yaldabaoth said to the authorities with him, “Come, let’s create a human being
after the image of God and with a likeness to ourselves, so that this human image
may give us light.”
They created through their respective powers, according to the features that
were given. Each of the authorities contributed a psychical feature corresponding
to the figure of the image they had seen. They created a being like the perfect
first human, and said, “Let’s call it Adam, that its name may give us power of
light.”
The powers began to create:
The first one, goodness, created a soul of bone.
The second, forethought, created a soul of sinew.
The third, divinity, created a soul of flesh.
The fourth, lordship, created a soul of marrow.
The fifth, kingdom, created a soul of blood.
The sixth, jealousy, created a soul of skin.
The seventh, understanding, created a soul of hair.
The throng of angels stood by and received these seven psychical substances
from the authorities, in order to create a network of limbs and trunk, with all
the parts properly arranged.
The first one, who is Raphao, began by creating the head,
Abron created the skull,
Meniggesstroeth created the brain,
Asterechme the right eye,
Thaspomocha the left eye,
Yeronumos the right ear,
Bissoum the left ear,
Akioreim the nose,
Banen-Ephroum the lips,
Amen the teeth,
Ibikan the molars,
Basiliademe the tonsils,
Achcha the uvula,
Adaban the neck,
Chaaman the vertebrae,
Dearcho the throat,
Tebar the right shoulder,
N…the left shoulder,
Mniarchon the right elbow,
…e the left elbow,
Abitrion the right underarm,
Euanthen the left underarm,
Krus the right hand,
Beluai the left hand,
Treneu the fingers of the right hand,
Balbel the fingers of the left hand,
Krima the fingernails,
Astrops the right breast,
Barroph the left breast,
Baoum the right shoulder joint,
Ararim the left shoulder joint,
Areche the belly,
Phthaue the navel,
Senaphim the abdomen,
Arachethopi the right ribs,
Zabedo the left ribs,
Barias the right hip,
Phnouth the left hip,
Abenlenarchei the marrow,
Chnoumeninorin the bones,
Gesole the stomach,
Agromauma the heart,
Bano the lungs,
Sostrapal the liver,
Anesimalar the spleen,
Thopithro the intestines,
Biblo the kidneys,
Roeror the sinews,
Taphreo the backbone,
Ipouspoboba the veins,
Bineborin the arteries,
Aatoimenpsephei the breaths in all the limbs,
Entholleia all the flesh,
Bedouk the right buttock,
Arabeei the left [buttock],
…the penis,
Eilo the testicles,
Sorma the genitals,
Gormakaiochlabar the right thigh,
Nebrith the left thigh,
Pserem the muscles of the right leg,
Asaklas the muscle of the left,
Ormaoth the right leg,
Emenun the left leg,
Knux the  right shin,
Tupelon the left shin,
Achiel the right ankle,
Phneme the left ankle,
Phiouthrom the right foot,
Boabel its toes,
Trachoun the left foot,
Phikna its toes,
Miamai the toenails,
Labernioum…
Those who are appointed over all these are seven in number:
Athoth,
Armas,
Kalila,
Yabel,
Sabaoth,
Cain,
Abel.
Those who activate the limbs are, part by part:
the head, Diolimodraza,
the neck, Yammeax,
the right shoulder, Yakouib,
the left shoulder, Ouerton,
the right hand, Oudidi,
the left one, Arbao,
the fingers of the right hand, Lampno,
the fingers of the left hand, Leekaphar,
the right breast, Barbar,
the left breast, Imae,
the chest, Pisandraptes,
the right shoulder joint, Koade,
the left shoulder joint, Odeor,
the right ribs, Asphixix,
the left ribs, Sunogchouta,
the abdomen, Arouph,
the womb, Sabalo,
the right thigh, Charcharb,
the left thigh, Chthaon,
all the genitals, Bathinoth,
the right leg, Choux,
the left leg, Charcha,
the right shin, Aroer,
the left shin, Toechtha,
the right ankle, Aol,
the left ankle, Charaner,
the right foot, Bastan,
its toes, Archentechtha,
the left foot, Marephnounth,
its toes, Abrana.
Seven have been empowered over all these:
Michael,
Uriel,
Asmenedas,
Saphasatoel,
Aarmouriam,
Richram,
Amiorps.
Those who are over the senses are Archendekta,
the one who is over perception is Deitharbathas,
the one who is over imagination is Oummaa,
the one who is over arrangement  is Aachiaram,
the one who is over all impulse to action is Riaramnacho.
The source of the demons that are in the entire body is divided into four:
heat,
cold,
wetness,
dryness,
and the mother of them all is matter.
The one who is lord over heat is Phloxopha,
the one who is lord over cold is Oroorrothos,
the one who is lord over what is dry is Erimacho,
the one who is lord over wetness is Athuro.
The mother of all these, Onorthochras, stands in the midst of them, for she is
unlimited and mingles with them all. She is matter, and by her they are
nourished.
The four principal demons are:
Ephememphi, the demon of pleasure,
Yoko, the demon of desire,
Nenentophni, the demon of grief,
Blaomen, the demon of fear.
The mother of them all is Esthesis-Ouch-Epi-Ptoe.
From the four demons have come passions:
From grief come jealousy, envy, pain, trouble, distress, hardheartedness,
anxiety, sorrow, and others.
From pleasure comes an abundance of evil, vain conceit, and the like.
From desire come anger, wrath, bitterness, intense lust, greed, and the like.
From fear come terror, servility, anguish, and shame.
All these are like virtues and vices. The insight into their true nature is Anaro,
who is head of the material soul,  and it dwells with Esthesis-Z-Ouch-EpiPtoe.
This is the number of angels. In all they number 365. They all worked
together until, limb by limb, the psychical and material body was completed.
Now, there are others over the remaining passions, and I have not told you about
them. If you want to know about them, the information is recorded in the Book
of Zoroaster.
Adam Receives Spirit and Life (19, 10–20, 28)
All the angels and demons worked together until they fashioned the psychical
body. But for a long time their creation did not stir or move at all.
When the Mother wanted to take back the power she had relinquished to the
first ruler, she prayed to the most merciful Mother-Father of the All. With a
sacred command the Mother-Father sent five luminaries down upon the place
of the angels of the first ruler. They advised him so that they might recover the
mother’s power.
They said to Yaldabaoth, “Breathe some of your spirit into the face of Adam,
and the body will arise.”
He breathed his spirit into Adam. The spirit is the power of his mother, but
he did not realize this, because he lives in ignorance. The Mother’s power went
out of Yaldabaoth and into the psychical body that had been made to be like the
one who is from the beginning.
The body moved and became powerful. And it was enlightened.
At once the rest of  the powers became jealous. Although Adam came
into being through all of them, and they gave their power to this human, Adam
was more intelligent than the creators and the first ruler. When they realized that
Adam was enlightened and could think more clearly than they and was stripped
of evil, they took and threw Adam into the lowest part of the whole material
realm.
The blessed, benevolent, merciful Mother-Father had compassion for the
Mother’s power that had been removed from the first ruler. The archons might
be able to overpower the psychical, perceptible body once again. So with its
benevolent and most merciful Spirit, the Mother-Father sent a helper to Adam—
enlightened Insight, who is from the Mother-Father and who was called Life.
She helped the whole creature, laboring with it, restoring it to its fullness,
teaching it about the descent of the seed, teaching it about the way of ascent,
which is the way of descent.
Enlightened Insight was hidden within Adam so that the archons might not
recognize her, but that Insight might be able to restore what the Mother lacked.
The Imprisonment of Humanity (20, 28–22, 28)
The human being Adam was revealed through the bright shadow within. And
Adam’s ability to think was greater than that of all the creators. When they
looked up, they saw that Adam’s ability to think was greater, and they devised a
plan with the whole throng of archons and angels. They took fire, earth,  and
water, and combined them with the four fiery winds. They wrought them
together and made a great commotion.
The rulers brought Adam into the shadow of death so that they might
produce a figure again, from earth, water, fire, and the spirit that comes from
matter—that is, from the ignorance of darkness, and desire, and their own
phony spirit. This figure is the cave for remodeling the body that these criminals
put on the human, the fetter of forgetfulness. Adam became a mortal person,
the first to descend and the first to become estranged.
Enlightened Insight within Adam, however, was rejuvenating Adam’s mind.
The archons took Adam and put Adam in paradise. They said, “Eat,”
meaning, Do so in a leisurely manner. But in fact their pleasure is bitter and
their beauty is perverse. Their pleasure is a trap, their trees are a sacrilege, their
fruit is deadly poison, and their promise is death.
They put their tree of life in the middle of paradise.
I shall teach you what the secret of their life is—the plan they devised
together, the nature of their spirit. The root of their tree is bitter, its branches are
death, its shadow is hatred, a trap is in its leaves, its blossom is bad ointment, its
fruit is death, desire is its seed, and it blossoms in darkness. The dwelling place
of those who taste  of it is the underworld, and darkness is their resting
place.
But the archons lingered in front of what they call the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, which is enlightened Insight, so that Adam might not behold
its fullness and recognize his shameful nakedness.
But I was the one who induced them to eat.
I said to the Savior, “Lord, was it not the serpent that instructed Adam to
eat?”
The Savior laughed and said, The serpent instructed them to eat of the
wickedness of sexual desire and destruction so that Adam might be of use to the
serpent.
The first ruler knew Adam was disobedient to him because of enlightened
Insight within Adam, which made Adam stronger of mind than he. He wanted to
recover the power that he himself had passed on to Adam. So he brought deep
sleep upon Adam.
I said to the Savior, “What is this deep sleep?”
The Savior said, It is not as Moses wrote and you heard. He said in his first
book, “He put Adam to sleep.” Rather, this deep sleep was a loss of sense.
Thus the first ruler said through the prophet, “I shall make their minds sluggish,
that they may neither understand nor discern.”
The Creation of Eve (22, 28–23, 35)
Enlightened Insight hid herself within Adam. The first ruler wanted to take her
from Adam’s side, but enlightened Insight cannot be apprehended. Although
darkness pursued her, it did not apprehend her. The first ruler removed part of
Adam’s power and created another figure in the form of a female, like the image
of Insight that had appeared to him. He put  the part he had taken from the
power of the human being into the female creature. It did not happen, however,
the way Moses said: “Adam’s rib.”
Adam saw the woman beside him. At once enlightened Insight appeared and
removed the veil that covered his mind. He sobered up from the drunkenness of
darkness. He recognized his counterpart and said, “This is now bone from my
bones and flesh from my flesh.”
For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and will join
himself to his wife, and the two of them will become one flesh. For his partner
will be sent to him, and he will leave his father and his mother.
Our sister Sophia is the one who descended in an innocent manner to restore
what she lacked. For this reason she was called Life—that is, the Mother of
the living—by the Forethought of the sovereignty of heaven and by [the Insight
that appeared] to Adam. Through her have the living tasted perfect
knowledge.
As for me, I appeared in the form of an eagle upon the tree of knowledge,
which is the Insight of the pure enlightened Forethought, that I might teach the
human beings and awaken them from the depth of sleep. For the two of them
were fallen and realized that they were naked. Insight appeared to them as
light and awakened their minds.
Yaldabaoth Defiles Eve (23, 35–25, 16)
When Yaldabaoth realized that the humans had withdrawn from him, he cursed
his earth. He found the woman as she was  preparing herself for her
husband. He was master over her. And he did not know the mystery that had
come into being through the sacred plan. The two of them were afraid to
denounce Yaldabaoth. He displayed to his angels the ignorance within him, and
he threw the humans out of paradise and cloaked them in thick darkness.
The first ruler saw the young woman standing next to Adam and noticed that
enlightened Insight of Life had appeared in her. Yet Yaldabaoth was full of
ignorance. So when the Forethought of the All realized this, she dispatched
emissaries, and they stole Life out of Eve.
The first ruler defiled Eve and produced in her two sons, a first and a second:
Elohim and Yahweh.
Elohim has the face of a bear,
Yahweh has the face of a cat.
One is just, the other is unjust.
He placed Yahweh over fire and wind,
he placed Elohim over water and earth.
He called them by the names Cain and Abel,
with a view to deceive.
To this day sexual intercourse has persisted because of the first ruler. He
planted sexual desire within the woman who belongs to Adam. Through
intercourse the first ruler produced duplicate bodies, and he blew some of his
false spirit into them.
He placed these two rulers over the elements so that they might rule over
the cave.
When Adam came to know the counterpart of his own foreknowledge, he
produced a son like  the child of humanity. He called him Seth, after the
manner of the generation in the eternal realms. Similarly, the mother sent
down her spirit, which is like her and is a copy of what is in the realm of
Fullness, for she was going to prepare a dwelling place for the eternal realms
that would come down.
The human beings were made to drink water of forgetfulness by the first
ruler, so that they might not know where they had come from. For a time the
seed remained and helped so that when the spirit descends from the holy realms,
it may raise up the seed and heal what it lacks, that the entire realm of Fullness
may be holy and lack nothing.
On Human Destiny (25, 16–30, 11)
I said to the Savior, “Lord, will all the souls then be led safely into pure light?”
He answered and said to me, These are great matters that have arisen in your
mind, and it is difficult to explain them to anyone except those of the unshakable
generation.
Those upon whom the spirit of life will descend and whom the spirit will
empower will be saved, and will become perfect and worthy of greatness, and
will be cleansed there of all evil and the anxieties of wickedness, since they are
no longer anxious for anything except the incorruptible alone, and concerned
with that from this moment on, without anger, jealousy, envy, desire, or greed for
anything.
They are affected by nothing but being in the flesh alone, and they wear the
flesh as they look forward to a time when they will be met  by those who
receive them. Such people are worthy of the incorruptible, eternal life and
calling. They endure everything and bear everything so as to finish the contest
and receive eternal life.
I said to him, “Lord, will the souls of people be [rejected] who have not
done these things, but upon whom the power and the spirit of life have
descended?”
He answered and said to me, If the spirit descends upon them, by all means
they will be saved and transformed. Power will descend upon every person, for
without it no one could stand. After birth, if the spirit of life grows and power
comes and strengthens that soul, no one will be able to lead it astray with evil
actions. But people upon whom the false spirit descends are misled by it and go
astray.
I said, “Lord, where will their souls go when they leave their flesh?”
He laughed and said to me, The soul in which there is more power than the
contemptible spirit is strong. She escapes from evil, and through the intervention
of the incorruptible one, she is saved and is taken up to eternal rest.
I said, “Lord, where will the souls go of people who have not known to
whom they belong?”
He said to me, The contemptible spirit has  grown stronger in such
people while they were going astray. This spirit lays a heavy burden on the soul,
leads her into evil deeds, and hurls her down into forgetfulness. After the soul
leaves the body, she is handed over to the authorities who have come into being
through the archon. They bind her with chains and throw her into prison. They
go around with her until she awakens from forgetfulness and acquires
knowledge. This is how she attains perfection and is saved.
I said, “Lord, how can the soul become younger and return into its mother’s
womb, or into the human?”
He was glad when I asked him about this, and he said to me, You are truly
blessed, for you have understood. This soul will be made to follow another soul
in whom the spirit of life dwells, and she is saved through that one. Then she
will not be thrust into flesh again.
I said, “Lord, where will the souls go of people who had knowledge but
turned away?”
He said to me, They will be taken to the place where the angels of misery go,
where there is no repentance. They will be kept there until the day when those
who have blasphemed against the spirit will be tortured and punished eternally.
I said, “Lord, where did the contemptible spirit come from?”
He said to me, The Mother-Father is great in mercy, the holy Spirit, who in
every way is compassionate,  who sympathizes with you, the Insight of
enlightened Forethought. This one raised up the offspring of the perfect
generation and their thought and the eternal light of the human. When the first
ruler realized that these people were exalted above him and could think better
than he, he wanted to grasp their thought. He did not know that they surpassed
him in thought and that he would be unable to grasp them.
He devised a plan with his authorities, who are his powers. Together they
fornicated with Sophia, and through them was produced bitter fate, the final,
fickle bondage. Fate is like this because the powers are fickle. To the present day
fate is tougher and stronger than what gods, angels, demons, and all the
generations have encountered. For from fate have come all iniquity and injustice
and blasphemy, the bondage of forgetfulness, and ignorance, and all burdensome
orders, weighty sins, and great fears.
Thus all of creation has been blinded so that none might know the God that
is over them all. Because of the bondage of forgetfulness, their sins have been
hidden. They have been bound with dimensions, times, and seasons, and fate is
master of all.
The first ruler regretted everything that had happened through him. Once
again he made a plan, to bring a flood  upon the human creation. The
enlightened majesty of Forethought, however, warned Noah. Noah announced
this to all the offspring, the human children, but those who were strangers to him
did not listen to him. It did not happen the way Moses said, “They hid in an
ark.”
Rather, they hid in a particular place, not only Noah, but also many other
people from the unshakable generation. They entered that place and hid in a
bright cloud. Noah knew about his supremacy. With him was the enlightened one
who had enlightened them, since the first ruler had brought darkness upon the
whole earth.
The first ruler plotted with his powers. He sent his angels to the human
daughters so they might take some of them and raise offspring for their
pleasure. At first they were unsuccessful. When they had proven unsuccessful,
they met again and devised another plan. They created a contemptible spirit
similar to the spirit that had descended, in order to adulterate souls through this
spirit. The angels changed their appearance to look like the partners of these
women, and filled the women with the spirit of darkness that they had
concocted, and with evil.
They brought gold, silver, gifts, copper, iron, metal, and all sorts of things.
They brought great anxieties to the people who followed them,  leading
them astray with many deceptions. These people grew old without experiencing
pleasure and died without finding truth or knowing the God of truth. In this way
all creation was forever enslaved, from the beginning of the world until the
present day.
The angels took women, and from the darkness they produced children
similar to their spirit. They closed their minds and became stubborn through the
stubbornness of the contemptible spirit until the present day.
Hymn of the Savior (30, 11–31, 25)
Now I, the perfect Forethought of the All, transformed myself into my offspring.
I existed first and went down every path.
I am the abundance of light,
I am the remembrance of Fullness.
I traveled in the realm of great darkness, and continued until I entered the
midst of the prison. The foundations of chaos shook, and I hid from them
because of their evil, and they did not recognize me.
Again I returned, a second time, and went on. I had come from the
inhabitants of light—I, the remembrance of Forethought.
I entered the midst of darkness and the bowels of the underworld, turning to
my task. The foundations of chaos shook as though to fall upon those who dwell
in chaos and destroy them. Again I hurried back to the root of my light so they
might not be destroyed before their time.
Again, a third time, I went forth—
I am the light dwelling in light,
I am the remembrance of Forethought—
so that I might enter the midst of darkness and the bowels  of the
underworld. I brightened my face with light from the consummation of their
realm and entered the midst of their prison, which is the prison of the body.
I said, Let whoever hears arise from deep sleep.
A person wept and shed tears. Bitter tears the person wiped away, and said,
“Who is calling my name? From where has my hope come as I dwell in the
bondage of prison?”
I said,
I am the Forethought of pure light,
I am the thought of the Virgin Spirit, who raises you to a place of honor.
Arise, remember that you have heard
and trace your root,
which is I, the compassionate.
Guard yourself against the angels of misery,
the demons of chaos, and all who entrap you,
and beware of deep sleep
and the trap in the bowels of the underworld.
I raised and sealed the person in luminous water with Five Seals, that death
might not prevail over the person from that moment on.
Conclusion (31, 25–32, 10)
Look, now I shall ascend to the perfect realm. I have finished everything for you
in your hearing. I have told you everything for you to record and communicate
secretly to your spiritual friends. This is the mystery of the unshakable
generation.
The Savior communicated this to John for him to record and safeguard. He
said to him, “Cursed be anyone who will trade these things for a gift, for food,
drink, clothes, or anything  like this.”
These things were communicated to him in a mystery, and at once the
Savior disappeared. Then John went to the other disciples and reported what
the Savior had told him.
Jesus Christ
Amen
The Secret Book According to John