The Revelation of Adam
The Revelation of Adam to Seth (64, 1–6)
The revelation that Adam taught his
son Seth in the seven hundredth year.

And he said, Listen to my words, my son
Seth.
Adam and Eve Are Created (64, 6–65, 23)
After God created me out of earth,
along with your mother Eve, I went about with her in a glory that she had beheld
in the eternal realm

we had come from. She instructed me in the knowledge

of
the eternal God.

We resembled the great eternal angels, for we were superior to
the god who had created us and the powers with him, whom we did not know.
God, the ruler

of the realms and the powers, angrily divided us. Then we
became two beings,

and the glory in our hearts departed from your mother Eve
and me, as did the previous knowledge that breathed in us. The glory fled from
us and entered another great [aeon] and another great [generation].

It was
not from this present aeon, from which your mother Eve and I derive, that
knowledge [came]. Rather, knowledge entered the seed of great eternal beings.
For this reason I myself have called you by the name of that human who is the
seed of the great generation, or from whom it comes.

After those days, the
eternal knowledge of the God of truth left your mother Eve and me, and from
then on we learned about mortal things, like human beings.
Then we came to recognize the god who had created us, for his powers were
not foreign to us. We served him in fear and subservience. And after that we
grew dim in our minds.
Adam Has a Revelation in His Sleep (65, 24–67, 14)
I was asleep in the thought
of my mind, and I saw in front of me three persons whose appearance I could not
recognize, since they were not from the powers of the god who had [created us].

They surpassed…glory…,

saying to me, “Adam, arise from the sleep of
death, and hear about the eternal realm and the seed of that human to whom life

has come, who came from your partner Eve and you.”
When I had heard these words from the great persons standing before me,
Eve and I sighed in our hearts. The Lord, the God who had created us, stood
before us and said to us, “Adam, why were you both sighing in your hearts?
Don’t you know that I am the god who created you? And that I breathed into you
a spirit of life, so you might be a living soul?”

Our eyes became dim. Then the god who created us created a son

from
himself and [your] mother Eve......

in…

the thought [of procreation].

I felt
a sweet desire for your mother. The power of our eternal knowledge was gone
and weakness overtook us, and the days of our life became few. I realized I had
come under the authority of death.
Adam Communicates the Revelation to His Son Seth
(67, 14–69, 1)
So now, my son Seth, I shall reveal to you what those people

whom I once saw before me revealed to me. After I have completed the times of
this present generation and the years of [the generation] have come to an end,
then [Noah will come, a] servant [of the Lord God who created us].

Noah and the Flood (69, 2–71, 8)
In order that [God], the ruler of the universe,

might destroy [all] flesh from the
earth because of what they seek, his rainstorms will pour down on those who are
from the offspring of people to whom has passed the life of knowledge, which
came from your mother Eve and me.

For those people were strangers to him.
After that great angels will come on high clouds, and they will bring those
people
into the place where the spirit of life dwells......

come from heaven
to [earth]. The whole population of fleshly beings will be lost in the [waters].
Then God will rest from his wrath. He will cast his power on the waters and
endow his sons

and [their wives] with power, by means of the ark, along with
the animals that pleased him and the birds of heaven that he called and released
on the earth.
God will say to Noah, whom generations will call Deucalion,

“Look, I have
protected <you> in the ark, along with your wife, your sons, their wives, their
animals, and the birds [of heaven] that you called [and released on the
earth].......

Therefore I shall give you and your sons the [earth]. You and
your sons will rule over it as kings, and you will refrain from producing
offspring of people who will stand in some other glory instead of in my
presence.”

Noah and Another Generation (71, 8–72, 15)
Then people will come to be like a
cloud of great light.
Those people who have been expelled

from the knowledge of the great
eternal realms and the angels will come forward and stand before Noah and the
realms.
God will say to Noah, “Why have you ignored what I told you? You have
created another generation so that you might bring contempt upon my power.”
Noah will say, “I testify before the might of your arm that the generation of
these people did not come from me or [my] sons.......”

…knowledge…. Those people will be brought into the land they deserve,
and a holy dwelling place will be built for them. And they will be called by that
name and live there six hundred years in knowledge of incorruptibility, and
angels of the great light will be with them. They will have no improper thought
in their hearts, but only the knowledge of God.
Noah Divides the Earth Among His Sons (72, 15–73, 12)
Then Noah will divide
the entire earth among his sons, Ham, Japheth, and Shem. He will say to them,
“My sons, listen to my words. Look, I have divided the earth among you.

But
serve God in fear and subservience all the days of your life, and do not let your
offspring turn away from the face of God, the ruler of the universe,…your…and
I.......”

[Then Shem]

the son of Noah [will say, “My] offspring will be pleasing
before you and your power. Seal it with your strong hand by fear and
commandment. None of the offspring that have come from me will turn away
from you and
God, the ruler of the universe, but they will serve in humility and
fear within the limits of their perception.”

The Four Hundred Thousand (73, 13–74, 26)
Then others from the offspring of
Ham and Japheth, four hundred thousand in number, will go out and enter
another land and sojourn there with those people who came from the great
eternal knowledge. The shadow of their power will protect those who sojourn
with them from all evil and all unclean desires.
Then the offspring of Ham and Japheth will form twelve kingdoms,

and
their other offspring will enter the kingdom of another group of people.

[Then]…will take counsel…aeons…

mortal…the great realms of
incorruptibility. They will approach their god Sakla,

and they will go in to the
powers and accuse the great people who are in their glory.

They will say to Sakla, “What is the power of these people who have stood
in your presence, who have separated from the offspring of Ham and Japheth
and are <four hundred thousand>

in number? They have been received into
another realm, one from which they have come, and they have overturned all the
glory of your power and the dominion of your hand. The offspring of Noah
through his son has fully accomplished your will and the will of all the powers in
the realms where your mighty power reigns supreme. But those people and the
people who sojourn in their glory have not done your will, and they have turned
aside your entire throng.”
The Creator Sends Fire, but the Generation of Those People Is
Rescued (74, 26–76, 7)
Then the god of the aeons will hand over to them some
who serve [him]…. They will come to that land

where the great people will
be, who have not been defiled and will not be defiled by any desire. For their
souls came not from a defiled hand, but from a great commandment of an eternal
angel.
Then fire, sulfur, and asphalt will be cast upon those people, and fire and
smoke will cover those realms.

The eyes of the powers of the heavenly
luminaries

will be darkened, and the inhabitants of the realms will not be able
to see in those days.
But great clouds of light will descend, and more clouds of light will come
down on them from the great eternal realms. Abrasax, Sablo, and Gamaliel

will
descend and rescue those people from the fire and wrath, and take them above
the realms and domains of the powers, and [take] them away…living…and take
them [away]…the realms…

dwelling place of the great…there with the holy
angels and the eternal realms. The people will become like those angels, for they
are not foreign to them. Rather, they labor with the incorruptible seed.
The Illuminator of Knowledge Comes (76, 8–77, 18)
Once again, for a third
time, the illuminator

of knowledge will pass by in great glory,

in order to
leave behind some of the offspring of Noah and the sons of Ham and Japheth, to
leave behind for himself trees that bear fruit.

The illuminator will redeem their
souls from the day of death. For all creation that came from mortal earth will be
under the authority of death, but those who reflect in their hearts on the
knowledge of the eternal God will not perish. They have received spirit not from
this kingdom, but from something eternal, angelic…illuminator…will come…
mortal…

Seth. And he will perform signs and wonders in order to bring
contempt upon the powers and their ruler.

The god of the powers will be troubled and say, “What is the power of this
human who is superior to us?”
He will arouse great wrath against that human, and the glory will depart and
dwell in holy houses it has chosen for itself. The powers will not see it with their
own eyes, and they will not see the illuminator either.
Then they will punish the flesh of the human on whom the holy Spirit has
come.

The Origin of the Illuminator (77, 18–83, 4)
The angels and all the generations
of the powers will use the name erroneously and ask,

“Where did this

come
from?” Or again, “Where did the words of falsehood, which all the powers have
failed to understand, come from?”

Now the first kingdom [says of him],
He came [from].......

A spirit…up.
He was nourished in the heavens.
He received its glory and power.
He came to the bosom of his mother,
and in this way he came to the water.

The second kingdom says of him,
He came from a great prophet.
A bird came, took the child who was born,
and brought him onto a high mountain.
He was nourished by the bird of heaven.
An angel came from there and said to him,
“Arise, God has given you glory.”
He received glory and strength,
and in this way he came to the water.
The third kingdom says of him,
He came from a virgin womb.
He was banished from his city, with his mother,
and was brought to a desert place.
He nourished himself there.
He came and received glory and power,
and in this way he came to the water.

The fourth kingdom says of him,
He came [from a virgin]….
[Solomon]

sought her,
along with Phersalo and Sauel
and his armies that had been sent out.
Solomon himself sent his army of demons

to search for the virgin.
They did not find the one they sought,
but rather the virgin who was given to them.
They brought her, Solomon took her,
and the virgin became pregnant
and gave birth to the child there.
She nourished him on a border of the desert.
When he was nourished,
he received glory and power
from the seed from which he had been conceived,
and in this way he came to the water.
The fifth kingdom says of him,
He came from a heavenly droplet
and was cast into the sea.
The abyss received him, gave birth to him,
and bore him up.
He received glory and power,
and in this way he came to the water.
The sixth kingdom [says],
A…[went] down to the realm

below to gather flowers.
She became pregnant from desire for the flowers,
and gave birth to him in that place.
The angels of the flower garden nourished him.
He received glory and power there,
and in this way he came to the water.

The seventh kingdom says of him,
He is a droplet and came from heaven to earth.
Dragons brought him down to their caves,
and he became a child.
A spirit came over him

and brought him on high
to where the droplet had come from.
He received glory and power there,
and in this way he came to the water.
The eighth kingdom says of him,
A cloud came over the earth
and enveloped a rock, and he came from it.

The angels over the cloud nourished him.
He [received] glory and power there,
and [in this way he] came to [the water].

The ninth kingdom says of him,
One of the nine muses went away by herself.
She came to a high mountain and relaxed there,
so that she desired herself alone
to become androgynous.
She fulfilled her desire
and became pregnant from it.
He was born.
The angels over desire nourished him.
He received glory and power there,
and in this way he came to the water.
The tenth kingdom says of him,
His god loved a cloud of desire.
He produced him by his hand
and ejaculated some of the droplet
upon the cloud near him,
and he was born.

He received glory and power there,
and in this way he came to the water.
The eleventh kingdom says of him,
The father desired his [own] daughter,
and she became pregnant from her father.
She cast…tomb out in the desert.

The angel nourished him there,
and in this way he came to the water.

The twelfth kingdom says of him,
He came from two luminaries.

They nourished him there.
He received glory and power,
and in this way he came to the water.
And the thirteenth kingdom says of him,
Every offspring of their ruler

is a word,

and this word received a mandate there.

He received glory and power,
and in this way he came to the water,
so that the desire of those powers might be satisfied.
But the generation without a king

says, God chose him from all the
eternal realms.
He made knowledge of the undefiled one of truth
to come to be [in] him.
He said, “The [great] illuminator has come
[from] foreign air, [from a] great eternal realm.”
And [he]

illumined the generation of those people, whom he had
chosen for himself,
so that they might illumine the whole eternal realm.
Final Vindication of the Seed of Seth (83, 4–85, 3)
Then the offspring, who will
receive his name in the water, and that of them all,

will oppose the power, and a
dark cloud will overshadow them.
The people will cry out with a loud voice and say, “Blessed are the souls of
those people, because they have known God with knowledge of truth. They will
live for ever and ever, because they have not been corrupted by their desires, as
the angels have, and they have not accomplished the deeds of the powers.
Rather, they have stood before him in knowledge of God, like light that has
come from fire and blood.
“But we have done everything through the foolishness of the powers. We
have boasted about the transgression of [all] our deeds. We have cried out
against [the God] of [truth], because all of his work…

is eternal. Take pity
on our spirits. For now we know our souls will surely die.”
Then a voice came to them <from> Micheus, Michar, and Mnesinous,

who
are over holy baptism and living water, saying, “Why were you crying out

against the living God with lawless voices and unlawful tongues and souls full of
blood and foulness? You are filled with deeds far from truth, yet your ways are
full of fun and laughter. You have defiled the water of life and have drawn it to
the will of the powers, into whose hands you have been given, to serve them.

“Your thought is not like that of those people whom you persecute…
desire….

Their fruit does not wither.

Rather, they will be known up to the
great eternal realms.”
The Revelation Is Preserved on a Mountain (85, 3–18)
The preserved words of
the God of the eternal realms were not copied in a book or put in writing.
Angelic beings, whom none of the human generations know, will convey them,
and they will be placed on a high mountain, on a rock of truth.

They will be
called words of incorruptibility and truth for those who
know the eternal God,
through wisdom of knowledge and teaching of the eternal angels, because the
eternal God knows all things.
Conclusion (85, 19–32)
These are the revelations Adam disclosed to his son Seth, and his son taught
them to his offspring. This is the hidden knowledge of Adam that he gave to
Seth, and this is holy baptism for people who have eternal knowledge, through
those born of the word and the incorruptible illuminators,

who have come from
the holy seed, Yesseus Mazareus Yessedekeus,

the living water.
The Revelation of Adam
