The Wisdom of Jesus Christ

 The Savior Appears to His Followers After the Resurrection
 (90, 14–93, 24)
After he rose from the dead, his twelve disciples and seven women continued to
be his followers. They went to Galilee, up on the mountain called
“Prophecy and Joy.” As they gathered together, they were confused about the
true nature of the universe, and the plan of salvation, and divine forethought, and
the strength of the authorities, and everything the Savior was doing with them in
the secret plan of salvation. Then the Savior appeared, not in his previous form
but in invisible spirit. He looked like a great angel of light, but I must not
describe his appearance. Mortal flesh could not bear it, but only pure and perfect
flesh, like what he taught us about, in Galilee, on the mountain called Olivet.
 He said, “Peace be with you. My peace I give to you.” They all marveled,
and they were afraid.
 The Savior laughed and said to them, “What are you thinking about?
Are you confused? What do you want to find out about?”
 Philip said, “About the nature of the universe and the plan of salvation.”
 The Savior said to them, “I want you to know that all people born on earth
from the foundation of the world until now are of dust, and though they have
inquired about God, who he is and what he is like, they have not found him. The
wisest of people have speculated on the basis of the order and movement of the
universe, yet their speculation has missed the truth. It is said that philosophers
voice three distinct opinions about the order of the universe, and they disagree
with each other. Some of them say that the world governs itself, others say
that divine forethought governs it, still others that fate is in charge. All these
opinions are wrong. Of the three opinions I have just mentioned, none of them
comes close to the truth. They are mere human opinions.
 “I have come from infinite light; I am here, and I can tell you exactly what
the truth is. For any life that comes from itself is defiled, made by itself.
Forethought lacks wisdom. Fate remains senseless.
 “It is given to you, however, to know the truth. Whoever deserves knowledge
will receive it, whoever has not been conceived by the semen of unclean sexual
rubbing but by the first one who was sent, for that person is immortal among
mortal people.”

 The One Who Is (93, 24–95, 18)
Matthew said to him, “Master, no one can find truth except through you.
Teach us the truth.”
 The Savior said, “The One Who Is is ineffable. From the foundation of the
world until now, no power, no authority, no creature, no nature has known the
One Who Is. Only the One Who Is, and anyone to whom this One wishes to give
revelation through the emissary from the first light, knows the One Who Is.
Henceforth, I am the great Savior.

 The One Who Is is
 immortal and eternal, and being eternal, is without birth,
 for whoever is born will die;
 unconceived, without a beginning,
 for whoever has a beginning has an end;
 undominated, without a name,
 for whoever has a name has been made by another;
 unnamable, with no human form,
 for whoever has a human form has been made by another.
 The One Who Is has an appearance of its own,
 not like anything you have seen and received,
 but an alien appearance that surpasses everything
 and is superior to the universe.
 It looks everywhere and beholds itself in itself.

 The One is infinite,
 incomprehensible,
 and constantly imperishable.
 The One is unequalled,
 immutably good,
 without fault,
 eternal,
 blessed,
 unknown,
 yet it knows itself.
 The One is immeasurable,
 untraceable,
 perfect,
 without defect.
 The One is blessed,
 imperishably,
 and is called the Father of all.”

 The Beginning of the Manifestation of the One Who Is (95, 19–98, 9)
Philip said, “Master, then how did the One Who Is appear to those who are
perfect?”
 The perfect Savior said, “Before anything becomes visible of visible things,
the majesty and the authority are in him, since he grasps everything while
nothing grasps him. He is all mind; he is thought, consideration, reflection,
reason, and power, and all are equally powerful. These are the sources of all
that is, and the entire generation, from first to last, was in the foreknowledge of
the infinite unconceived Father.”
 Thomas said to him, “Master, Savior, why did these come to be, and why
were they revealed?”
 The perfect Savior said to him, “I have come from the infinite to tell you
everything. The Spirit who is was the one who conceives, the one who has the
power of conception and can [give] form, so that the abundant wealth
within might be revealed. In mercy and love the Spirit wished to produce fruit
independently, that the Spirit might not enjoy goodness alone but that other
spirits of the unshakable generation might produce bodies and fruit, glory and
honor, in imperishability and the infinite grace of the Spirit. In this way the
goodness of the Spirit could be revealed by the self-conceived God, the Father of
all imperishability and those who were to come later. But nothing had become
visible yet.
 “There are many differences among the imperishable beings.”
 He spoke out and said, “Whoever has ears to hear about infinite things
should hear. It is to those who are awake that I speak.”
 He went on and said, “Everything from the perishable will perish, since
it is from the perishable. But everything from the imperishable does not perish
but becomes imperishable, since it is from the imperishable. Many people have
gone astray because they did not know about this distinction, and they have
died.”
 The Father and the Kingless Generation (98, 9–100, 16)
Mary said to him, “Master, then how can we know this?”
 The perfect Savior said, “Bring yourselves from what is invisible to the end
of those who are visible, and the emanation of thought itself will reveal to you
how faith in what is invisible can be found in those who are visible, who belong
to the unconceived Father. Whoever has ears to hear should hear.
 “The Lord of the universe is addressed not as Father but as Forefather. <The
Father is> the beginning of those who will appear, but the Lord is the
Forefather without a beginning. When the Forefather saw himself within himself
in a mirror, his resemblance appeared there, but his image appeared as the divine
Father by himself and the reflection above reflections and the first-existing
unconceived Father. He is as old as the light before him but not as powerful.
Afterward there was revealed a multitude of beings, just as old and powerful,
who are self-conceived and reflective. Glorious and without number, their
generation is designated the generation over whom there is no kingdom. You
yourselves have appeared from the people of this generation. And the whole
multitude of beings with no kingdom over them is designated the children
of the unconceived Father, God, Savior, Son of God, whose likeness is among
you. This is the unknowable one, who is full of imperishable glory and
ineffable joy, and all these beings are at rest in him, constantly rejoicing in
ineffable joy in the Father’s unfading glory and unending praise that was never
heard or known among the aeons and their worlds until now.”

 Immortal Humanity and Sophia Appear (100, 16–103, 21)
Matthew said to him, “Master, Savior, how was Humanity revealed?”
 The perfect Savior said, “I want you to know that the being who appeared
before the universe in infinity is the one who grows by himself, the self-
made Father. He is full of bright light and ineffable. In the beginning, when he
decided to turn his likeness into a great power, at once the strength of that light
appeared as an immortal androgynous Human, so that through that immortal
Human, people might come to salvation and wake up from forgetfulness,
through the interpreter who was sent, who is with you until the end of the time of
poverty of those who are robbers.
 “The companion of the immortal Human is great Sophia, who from the
beginning was destined to be united with him, by the self-conceived Father,
through the immortal Human who appeared as the first one and as divinity and
kingdom. The Father, called the Human, Father by himself, revealed this.
He created an exalted aeon, named the Eight, for his own majesty, and he was
given great authority. He rules over the impoverished creation, and he created
gods and angels and archangels, myriads without number, to serve him, through
that light, and the triple-male Spirit, which is of his companion Sophia.
 “Through this God came divinity and kingdom. For that reason this God was
called God of gods and King of kings. The first Human has a mind of his own
within, and thought, appropriate to him, and consideration, reflection, reason,
 and power.
 “All these attributes are perfect and immortal. They are equally imperishable
but not equally powerful. They are different, like the difference between father
and son, <and son> and thought, and thought and the rest.
 “As I said before, about what was produced, the One is first. After
everything, all that was revealed came from his power. From what was created
came what was fashioned. From what was fashioned came what was formed.
From what was formed came what was named. This is how differences came to
be among what was unconceived, from beginning to end.”

 The Child of God and Sophia, Love, Appear (103, 22–106, 9)
Then Bartholomew said to him, “How is it that this being was called a
human being and the Son of Humanity in the gospel? To which of these figures
is the Son related?”
 The Holy One said to him, “I want you to know that the first Human is
referred to as the one who conceives, the self-perfected mind. He reflected with
his companion great Sophia and disclosed his first-begotten androgynous child.
Its male name is first-begetting Son of God, its female name first-begetting
Sophia, Mother of the universe. Some call her love, and the first-begotten is
called Christ. With authority from his Father, he created a host of angels
without number to serve him, from spirit and light.”
 His disciples said to him, “Master, tell us about the one called the Human, so
that we also might have a precise understanding of his glory.”
 The perfect Savior said, “Whoever has ears to hear should hear. The first-
conceiving father is called Adam, eye of light, because he came from shining
light, and his holy angels, ineffable and with no shadow, constantly rejoice in
their reflections, received from their father. The entire kingdom of the Child of
Humanity, who is called the Son of God, is full of ineffable joy, with no shadow,
and eternal praise. They rejoice over his imperishable glory, which until
now has never been heard and never been revealed in the aeons that came later
and their worlds.
 “I have come from the self-conceived one and the first infinite light, to reveal
everything to you.”

 The Savior, Pistis Sophia, and Other Powers Appear
 (106, 9–108, 16)
His disciples said again, “Tell us exactly how they have come down from what is
invisible, from the immortal realm to the world of mortality.”
 The perfect Savior said, “The Child, the Son of Humanity, came together
with his companion Sophia and disclosed a bright androgynous light. The male
name of the light is Savior, the one who conceives all, and the female name is
all-conceiving Sophia. Some call her Pistis, Faith.
 “All who come into the world, like a droplet from the light, are sent by
him into the world of the ruler of the universe, to be guarded by him. The fetter
of his forgetfulness has kept the light bound, by the will of Sophia, so that the
reality of the circumstance might be <revealed> through the light to the whole
impoverished world, on account of the arrogance and blindness of the ruler of
the universe and the name of ignorance he was given.
 “I have come from the places above by the will of the bright light, and I have
escaped from that fetter. I have smashed the work of those who are robbers. I
have awakened the droplet sent from Sophia, that it might produce an abundance
of fruit through me, and be made perfect and never again be defective. Then the
droplet from the light may be <made whole>31 through me, the great Savior, and
its glory may be revealed, and Sophia also may be vindicated of what was
defective, and her children may never again be defective, but may attain
glory and honor and go up to their Father and know the words of the light of
maleness.
 “You in turn were sent by the Son, who was sent that you might receive light
and escape the forgetfulness of the authorities. In this way the unclean sexual
rubbing from the ferocious fire of the flesh of the authorities may never again
come to expression through you. Trample on their evil intentions.”

 Eternal Realms and Aeons Appear (108, 16–111, 11)
Then Thomas said to [him], “Master, Savior, how many realms are there of those
who surpass the heavens?”
 The perfect Savior said, “I congratulate you for asking about the exalted
realms, for your roots are in infinite places. When those whom I have
already discussed were revealed, the self-conceiving Father moved to create
twelve eternal realms to serve twelve angels. They all are perfect and good. This
is the way in which the defect of femaleness became apparent.”
 They said to him, “How many realms are there for the immortals, starting
with those that are infinite?”
 The perfect Savior said, “Whoever has ears to hear should hear. The
first eternal realm is that of the Child of Humanity, who is called the first to
conceive, and the Savior, who has appeared. The second eternal realm is that of
the Human called Adam, eye of light. What holds these is the realm over which
there is no kingdom, the realm of the eternal infinite God, the self-conceived
aeon of the aeons in it, the eternal aeon of the immortals, whom I have already
described. This is the aeon above the seventh realm that appeared from
Sophia, which is the first realm.
 “The immortal Human has revealed realms, powers, and kingdoms, and has
given authority to all who come through him, that they might do what they want
until the last things above chaos. They came together with each other and
disclosed every majesty, even from spirit, and a multitude of lights, glorious and
without number. The first, the second, and the third eternal realms were
named in the beginning. The first is called unity and rest. Each has its own name,
and the third realm was called assembly, after the great multitude that
appeared. A multitude of beings revealed themselves in One. Because the many
 gather and experience unity, <they> are called the assembly, from the
assembly that surpasses heaven. We call them the assembly of the eighth
realm. It appeared in an androgynous form and was given male and female
names. The male part was called the assembly and the female part life, to
indicate that from a female came life for all the realms.

 The Names of the Eternal Realms All Come from Above
 (111, 11–112, 19)
“All the names came from the original source. That is the one who united with
thought, and at once powers appeared, called gods. From their wisdom the gods
of gods revealed gods, and from their wisdom <the gods> revealed lords, and
from their thoughts the lords of lords revealed lords, and from their power the
lords revealed archangels, and from their words the archangels revealed angels,
 and from them came ideas, with structure and form and names for all the
aeons and their worlds.
 “The immortals whom I have described, all of them, have authority from the
immortal Human, who is called silence, because by reflecting without speaking
the entire majesty of silence was perfected. For the imperishable beings had
authority, and each created a great kingdom in the eighth realm, and thrones and
temples and firmaments for their own majesties. All these came to be by the will
of the Mother of all.”

 The Eternal Realms Are Completed
 (112, 19–114, 8)
Then the holy apostles said to him, “Master, Savior, tell us about those who are
in the eternal realms, for we must ask about them.”
 The perfect Savior said, “Whatever you ask about I shall tell you.
These beings created hosts of angels, myriads without number, to serve and
glorify them. They created virgin spirits, ineffable and unchangeable lights, and
they are free of sickness and weakness. There is will, and they come to be at
once.
 “Thus the eternal realms were completed, quickly, with the heavens and
firmaments, in the glory of the immortal Human and his companion Sophia. This
is where every realm and the world and those that were to follow got their ideas
for their creation of patterns in the heavens of chaos and their worlds. All
natures, beginning with the revelation of chaos, are in the light that shines with
no shadow but with indescribable joy and unspeakable praise. They continue to
rejoice over their unfading glory and immeasurable rest, which cannot be
described among all the realms that came to be later and all their powers. I have
said all this to you so that you might shine in light even more brightly than
these.”

 The Story of Sophia and Yaldabaoth
 (III 114, 8–BG 8502 119, 16)
Mary said to him, “Holy master, where did your disciples come from, where are
they going, and what should they do here?”
 The perfect Savior said to them, “I want you to know that Sophia, the Mother
of all and the companion, desired all by herself to bring these creatures into
being without her male companion. By the will of the Father of all, that his
unimaginable goodness might be released, he created a curtain between the
immortals and those who were to come later, so that this might follow
every realm and chaos, that what is defective from the female might appear, and
error might contend with her. These constituted the curtain of the spirit.
 “From the eternal realms above the emanations of light, as I said before, a
droplet from light and spirit came down to the lower regions of the ruler of the
universe, in chaos, so that the forms they shaped might appear from that droplet.
This is judgment against the chief creator, called Yaldabaoth.

 The Story of Earthly Adam (BG 8502 119, 17–121, 13)
“That droplet revealed the forms they shaped, through breath, as a living
soul. This was withered and asleep in the ignorance of the soul. When this being
was warmed by the breath of the bright light of the male, he formulated a
thought, and names were given to everything in the world of chaos, through the
immortal one, when breath blew into him. This happened by the will of Mother
Sophia, so that the immortal Human might reassemble the garments there
as judgment against those who are robbers. Then <he> welcomed the breath that
was blown, but he was like soul and could not assume that power until the
number of chaos and the time set by the great angel could be complete.

 The Restoration and Unification of Humanity
 (BG 8502 121, 13–III 119, 8)
“I have taught you about the immortal Human, and I have freed him from the
fetters of the robbers. I have broken the gates of those without pity, right in
front of them. I have humiliated their evil intentions, and they all have been put
to shame and have emerged from their ignorance.
 “For this reason I have come here, that these may be united with spirit and
breath, and two may become one, as in the beginning. Then you may
produce an abundance of fruit and go up to the one who is from the beginning, in
ineffable joy and glory and [honor and] grace of [the Father of all].
 “Whoever knows [the Father in pure] knowledge [will depart] to the Father
[and be at rest in] the unconceived [Father. Whoever knows him in a defective
way] will depart [to what is defective] and experience the rest [that the eighth
realm provides]. Let whoever knows the immortal [spirit] of light in silence,
through reflection and agreement in truth, bring me signs of the invisible one,
and such a person will become a light in the spirit of silence. Let whoever knows
the Child of Humanity in knowledge and love bring me a sign of the Child
of Humanity, so that such a person may depart to the dwelling places with those
in the eighth realm.
 “Look, I have revealed to you the name of the perfect one, all the will of the
mother of the holy angels, in order that the male [multitude] may be made
complete here. Then there [may appear, in the realms, the infinite beings and]
those who [have come to be in the] untraceable [wealth of the great] invisible
[Spirit, and] all may receive from his goodness, even the wealth [of their rest]
with no [kingdom over it].
 “I have come [from the first] who was sent to reveal to you the one who is
from the beginning, because of the arrogance of the chief creator and his angels,
for they claim to be gods. I have come to eradicate their blindness, that I might
tell everyone about the God who is above all.
 “So trample on their graves, humiliate their wicked intentions, break their
yoke, and raise up those who are mine. I have given you authority over
everything as children of light, to trample on their power with your feet.”

 The Savior Departs from His Followers (119, 8–18)
This is what the blessed Savior [said, and then he disappeared] from them. [All
the disciples] remained in [great, ineffable joy] in [the spirit from] that day on.
[And his disciples] began to preach the gospel of God, the eternal, imperishable
Spirit. Amen.

 The Wisdom of Jesus