[문단 1] The Letter of James (1, 1–8)
[James] writes to….
Peace be [with you from] peace,
[love] from love,
[grace] from grace,
[faith] from faith,
life from holy life.

[문단 2] Secret Books (1, 8–2, 7)
You have asked me to send you a secret book revealed to me and Peter by the
master, and I could not turn you down, nor could I speak to you, so [I have
written] it in Hebrew and have sent it to you, and to you alone. But since you
are a minister of the salvation of the saints, do your best to be careful not to
communicate to many people this book that the Savior did not want to
communicate even to all of us, his twelve disciples. Nonetheless, blessed will
they be who will be saved through the faith of this treatise.
Ten months ago I sent you another secret book that the Savior revealed to
me. Think of that book as revealed to me, James. But as for this book, I [have
not yet fully understood it, and it was also] revealed [for you and] those who are
yours, so [try] to comprehend [its meaning]. This is how [you can be] saved, and
[then] you should [also make it known].

[문단 3] Jesus Appears to Peter and James (2, 7–3, 38)
The twelve disciples were all sitting together, recalling what the Savior had said
to each of them, whether in a hidden or an open manner, and organizing it in
books. I was writing what is in [my book]. Look, the Savior appeared, after he
had left [us, while we] were watching for him.
Five hundred fifty days after he rose from the dead, we said to him, “Did
you depart and leave us?”

Jesus said, “No, but I shall return to the place from which I came. If you
want to come with me, come.”
They all answered and said, “If you order us, we’ll come.”
He said, “I tell you the truth, no one will ever enter heaven’s kingdom
because I ordered it, but rather because you yourselves are filled. Leave James
and Peter to me that I may fill them.”
When he called the two of them, he took them aside and commanded the rest
to keep doing what they were doing.
The Savior said, “You have been favored [through the Father to receive
my sayings. The other disciples also] have written [my sayings in their] books as
if [they have understood, but be careful. They have done their] work without
[really understanding]. They have listened like [foolish people], and…they have
not understood.
“Do you not want to be filled?
“Your hearts are drunk.
“Do you not want to be sober?
“You ought to be ashamed.
“From now on, awake or asleep, remember that you have seen the Son of
Humanity and have spoken with him and have listened to him.
“Woe to those who have seen the Son of Humanity.
“Blessed will you be who have not seen the human, or associated with him,
or spoken with him, or listened to anything from him. Yours is life.
“Understand that he healed you when you were sick, that you might reign.
“Woe to those who have found relief from their sickness, for they will
relapse into sickness.
“Blessed are you who have not been sick, and have known relief before
getting sick. God’s kingdom is yours.
“So I tell you, be filled and leave no space within you empty, or he who is
coming will mock you.”

[문단 4] Being Filled and Lacking (3, 38–4, 22)
Then Peter answered, “Look, three times you have told us, ‘Be [filled,’ but]
we are filled.”
The [Savior answered] and said, “For [this reason I have told] you, ‘[Be
filled],’ that you may not [lack. Those who lack] will not [be saved]. To be filled
is good and to lack is bad. Yet since it is also good for you to lack but bad for
you to be filled, whoever is filled also lacks. One who lacks is not filled in the
way another who lacks is filled, but whoever is filled is brought to an

appropriate end. So you should lack when you can fill yourselves and be filled
when you lack that you may be able to [fill] yourselves more. Be filled with
spirit but lack in reason, for reason is of the soul. It is soul.”

[문단 5] Believe in My Cross (4, 22–6, 21)
I answered and said to him, “Master, we can obey you if you wish, for we have
forsaken our fathers and our mothers and our villages and have followed you.
Give us the means not to be tempted by the evil devil.”
The master answered and said, “What good is it to you if you do the Father’s
will, but you are not given your part of his bounty when you are tempted by
Satan? But if you are oppressed by Satan and persecuted and do the Father’s 
will, I [say] he will love you, make you my equal, and consider you beloved
through his forethought, and by your own choice. Won’t you stop loving the
flesh and fearing suffering? Don’t you know that you have not yet been abused,
unjustly accused, locked up in prison, unlawfully condemned, crucified
<without> reason, or buried in the sand as I myself was by the evil one? Do
you dare to spare the flesh, you for whom the spirit is a wall surrounding you? If
you consider how long the world has existed before you and how long it will
exist after you, you will see that your life is but a day and your sufferings but an
hour. The good will not enter the world. Disdain death, then, and care about life.
Remember my cross and my death, and you will live.”
I answered and said to him, “Master, do not mention to us the cross and
death, for they are far from you.”
The master answered and said, “I tell you the truth, none will be saved unless
they believe in my cross, for God’s kingdom belongs to those who have believed
in my cross. Be seekers of death, then, like the dead who seek life, for what they
seek becomes apparent to them. And what is there to cause them concern? As for
you, when you search out death, it will teach you about being chosen. I tell you
the truth, no one afraid of death will be saved, for the kingdom of death
belongs to those who are put to death. Become better than I. Be like the child
of the holy Spirit.”

[문단 6] The Head of Prophecy (6, 21–8, 27)
Then I asked him, “Master, how can we prophesy to those who ask us to
prophesy to them? There are many who bring a request to us and look to us to
hear our pronouncement.”
The master answered and said, “Don’t you know that the head of prophecy

was cut off with John?”
I said, “Master, it is impossible to remove the head of prophecy, isn’t it?”
The master said to me, “When you realize what ‘head’ means, and that
prophecy comes from the head, then understand the meaning of ‘its head was 
removed.’
“First I spoke with you in parables, and you did not understand. Now I am
speaking with you openly, and you do not grasp it. Nevertheless, you were for
me a parable among parables and a disclosure among things revealed.
“Be eager to be saved without being urged. Rather, be fervent on your own
and, if possible, outdo even me, for this is how the Father will love you.
“Come to hate hypocrisy and evil intention. Intention produces hypocrisy,
and hypocrisy is far from truth.
“Do not let heaven’s kingdom wither away. It is like a palm shoot whose
dates dropped around it. It produced buds, and after they grew, its productivity
dried up. This is also what happened with fruit that came from this single root.
After it was harvested, fruit was obtained by many. It certainly would be good if
you could produce new growth now. You would find it.
“Since I was glorified like this once before, why do you hold me back when I
am eager to go? After my labor you have made me stay with you another
eighteen days because of the parables. For some people it was enough to listen
to the teaching and understand ‘The Shepherds,’ ‘The Seed,’ ‘The Building,’
‘The Lamps of the Young Women,’ ‘The Wage of the Workers,’ and ‘The Silver
Coins and the Woman.’
“Be eager for the word. The first aspect of the word is faith, the second is
love, the third is works, and from these comes life.
“The word is like a grain of wheat. When someone sowed it, he had faith in
it, and when it sprouted, he loved it, because he saw many grains instead of just
one. And after he worked, he was saved because he prepared it as food and he
still kept some out to sow.
“This is also how you can acquire heaven’s kingdom for yourselves. Unless
you acquire it through knowledge, you will not be able to find it.”

[문단 7] Be Sober, Be Saved (8, 27–9, 23)
“So I say to you, be sober. Do not go astray. And often have I said to you all
together, and also to you alone, James, be saved. I have commanded you to
follow me, and I have taught you how to speak before the rulers.
“See that I have come down and have spoken and have exerted myself and
have won my crown when I saved you. I came down to live with you that

you might also live with me. And when I found that your houses had no roofs, I
lived in houses that could receive me when I came down.
“Trust in me, my brothers. Understand what the great light is. The Father
does not need me. A father does not need a son, but it is the son who needs the
father. To him I am going, for the Father of the Son is not in need of you.
“Listen to the word, understand knowledge, love life, and no one will
persecute you and no one will oppress you other than you yourselves.”

[문단 8] Woe to You, Blessed Are You (9, 24–11, 6)
“You wretches! You poor devils! You pretenders to truth! You falsifiers of
knowledge! You sinners against the spirit! Do you still dare to listen when from
the beginning you should have been speaking? Do you still dare to sleep when
from the beginning you should have been awake so that heaven’s kingdom might
receive you? I tell you the truth, it is easier for a holy person to sink into
defilement and for an enlightened person to sink into darkness than for you to
reign—or not to reign.
“I have remembered your tears, your mourning, and your grief. They are far
from us. You who are outside the Father’s inheritance, weep when you should,
mourn, and preach what is good. The Son is ascending, as is proper.
“I tell you the truth, if I had been sent to those who would listen to me and
had spoken with them, I would never have come down to earth. Now be
ashamed.
“Look, I shall be leaving you and go away, and I do not want to stay with
you any longer, just as you yourselves have not wanted this. Follow me quickly.
This is why I tell you, for you I came down. You are loved ones. You are the
ones who will bring life to many people. Invoke the Father, pray to God
frequently, and he will be generous with you.
“Blessed is one who has seen you with him when he is proclaimed among
the angels and glorified among the saints. Yours is life. Rejoice and be glad as
 children of God. Observe his will that you may be saved. Accept correction
from me and save yourselves. I am mediating for you with the Father, and he
will forgive you many things.”

[문단 9] Few Find Heaven’s Kingdom (11, 6–12, 17)
When we heard this, we were delighted. We had become gloomy because of
what we said earlier. But when he saw us happy, he said:
“Woe to you who are in need of an advocate.

“Woe to you who stand in need of grace.
“Blessed will they be who have spoken out and acquired grace for
themselves.
“Compare yourselves to foreigners. How are they viewed in your city? Why
are you anxious to banish yourselves on your own and distance yourselves from
your city? Why abandon your dwelling on your own and make it available for
those who want to live in it? You exiles and runaways, woe to you, for you will
be captured.
“Or maybe you think that the Father is a lover of humanity, or that he is won
over by prayers, or that he is gracious to one because of another, or that he
tolerates whoever is seeking?
“He knows about desire and what the flesh needs. Doesn’t it desire the
soul? The body does not sin apart from the soul just as the soul is not saved
apart from the spirit. But if the soul is saved from evil and the spirit too is saved,
the body becomes sinless. The spirit animates the soul but the body kills it. The
soul kills itself.
“I tell you the truth, he certainly will not forgive the sin of the soul or the
guilt of the flesh, for none of those who have worn the flesh will be saved. Do
you think that many have found heaven’s kingdom?
“Blessed is one who has seen oneself as a fourth one in heaven.”

[문단 10] Know Yourselves (12, 17–13, 25)
When we heard this, we became sad. But when he saw that we were sad, he said,
“I say this to you that you may know yourselves.
“Heaven’s kingdom is like a head of grain that sprouted in a field. And when
it was ripe, it scattered its seed, and again it filled the field with heads of grain
for another year. So with you, be eager to harvest for yourselves a head of the
grain of life that you may be filled with the kingdom.
“And as long as I am with you, pay attention to me and trust in me, but when
I am far from you, remember me. And remember me because I was with you and
you did not know me.
“Blessed will they be who have known me.
“Woe to those who have heard and have not believed.
“Blessed will they be who have not seen but yet have [believed].
“Once again I appeal to you. I am disclosed to you as I am building a house
useful to you when you find shelter in it, and it will support your neighbors’
house when theirs threatens to collapse.
“I tell you the truth, woe to those for whom I was sent down here.

“Blessed will they be who are going up to the Father.
“Again I warn you, you who exist. Be like those who do not exist that you
may dwell with those who do not exist.
“Do not let heaven’s kingdom become a desert within you. Do not be proud
because of the light that enlightens. Rather, act toward yourselves as I myself
have toward you. I have put myself under a curse for you that you might be
saved.”

[문단 11] The Last Word (13, 26–15, 5)
Peter responded to these comments and said, “Sometimes you urge us on toward
heaven’s kingdom, but at other times you turn us away, master. Sometimes you
encourage us, draw us toward faith, and promise us life, but at other times you
drive us away from heaven’s kingdom.”
The master answered and said to us, “I have offered you faith many times—
and have revealed myself to you, James—and you have not known me.
Now I see you often rejoicing. And although you are delighted about the promise
of life, you are sad and gloomy when you are taught about the kingdom.
“Nevertheless, you, through faith and knowledge, have received life. So
disregard rejection when you hear it, but when you hear about the promise, be
joyful all the more.
“I tell you the truth, whoever will receive life and believe in the kingdom
will never leave it, not even if the Father wants to banish him.
“This is all I shall tell you at this time. Now I shall ascend to the place from
which I have come. When I was eager to go, you have driven me off, and instead
of accompanying me, you have chased me away.
“Be attentive to the glory that awaits me, and when you have opened your
hearts, listen to the hymns that await me up in heaven. Today I must take my
place at the right hand of my Father.
“I have spoken my last word to you; I shall depart from you, for a chariot of
spirit has carried me up, and from now on I shall strip myself that I may clothe
myself.
“So pay attention: blessed are those who have proclaimed the Son before he
came down, so that, when I did come, I might ascend.
“Blessed three times over are those who were proclaimed by the Son
before they came into being, so that you might share with them.”

[문단 12] Apocalyptic Ascent (15, 5–16, 11)
When he said this, he left. Peter and I knelt down, gave thanks, and sent our
hearts up to heaven. We heard with our ears and saw with our eyes the noise of
wars, a trumpet blast, and great turmoil.
When we passed beyond that place, we sent our minds up further. We saw
with our eyes and heard with our ears hymns, angelic praises, and angelic
rejoicing. Heavenly majesties were singing hymns, and we rejoiced too.
Again after this we wished to send our spirits up to the Majesty. When we
ascended, we were not allowed to see or hear anything. For the other disciples
called to us and asked us, “What did you hear from the teacher? What did he tell
you? Where did he go?”
We answered them, “He ascended. He gave us his right hand, and promised
all of us life. He showed us children coming after us and commanded [us] to
love them, since we are to be [saved] for their sakes.”
When they heard this, they believed the revelation, but they were angry
about those who would be born. Not wishing to give them reason to take offense,
I sent each of them to a different location. I myself went up to Jerusalem,
praying that I might acquire a share with the loved ones who are to appear.

[문단 13] Final Advice (16, 12–30)
I pray that the beginning may come from you. This is how I can be saved. They
will be enlightened through me, by my faith, and through another’s that is better
than mine. I wish mine to be the lesser.
Do your best to be like them, and pray that you may acquire a share with
them. Beyond what I have said, the Savior did not disclose any revelation to us
on their behalf. We proclaim a share with those for whom the message was
proclaimed, those whom the lord has made his children.
