[문단 1] The Gospel of Truth (16, 31–17, 4)
The gospel of truth is joy for people who have received grace from the Father of
truth, that they might know him through the power of the Word. The Word has
come from the fullness in the Father’s thought and mind. The Word is called
“Savior,” a term that refers to the work he is to do to redeem those who had not
known  the Father. And the term “gospel” refers to the revelation of hope,
since it is the means of discovery for those who seek him.

[문단 2] Ignorance Brings Error (17, 4–18, 11)
All have sought for the one from whom they have come forth. All have been
within him, the illimitable, the inconceivable, who is beyond all thought. But
ignorance of the Father brought terror and fear, and terror grew dense like a fog,
so that no one could see. Thus Error grew powerful. She worked on her material
substance in vain. Since she did not know the truth, she assumed a fashioned
figure and prepared, with power and in beauty, a substitute for truth.
    This was not humiliating for the illimitable, inconceivable one. For this
terror and forgetfulness and this deceptive figure were as nothing, whereas
established truth is unchanging, unperturbed, and beyond beauty.
    For this reason despise Error.
    Error had no root; she was in a fog regarding the Father. She was there
preparing works and deeds of forgetfulness and fear in order, by them, to attract
those of the middle and take them captive.
    The forgetfulness of Error was not apparent. It is not …from the Father.
Forgetfulness did not come into being from the Father, but if it did come into
being, it is because of him. What comes into being within him is knowledge,
which appeared so that forgetfulness might be destroyed and the Father might be
known. Forgetfulness came into being because the Father was not known, so as
soon as the Father comes to be known, forgetfulness will cease to be.

[문단 3] Jesus as Fruit of Knowledge (18, 11–19, 17)
This is the gospel of him whom they seek, revealed to the perfect through the
Father’s mercy. Through the hidden mystery Jesus Christ enlightened those who
were in darkness because of forgetfulness. He enlightened them and showed the
way, and that way is the truth he taught them.
    For this reason Error was angry with him and persecuted him, but she was
restrained by him and made powerless. He was nailed to a tree, and he became
fruit of the knowledge of the Father. This fruit of the tree, however, did not bring
destruction when it was eaten, but rather it caused those who ate of it to come
into being. They were joyful in this discovery, and he found them within himself
and they found him within themselves.
    And as for the illimitable, inconceivable perfect Father who made all, the All
is within him and needs him. Although he kept within himself their perfection,
which he had not given to all, the Father was not jealous. What jealousy could
there be between himself and his own members? For even if  the members of
the eternal realm had [received] their [perfection], they could not have
approached…the Father. He kept their perfection within himself, giving it to
them as a means to return to him with complete, single-minded knowledge. He is
the one who set the All in order, and the All is within him. The All was in need
of him, just as a person who is not known to other people wants them to know
him and love him. For what did the All need if not the knowledge of the Father?

[문단 4] Jesus as Guide and Teacher (19, 17–34)
He became a guide, a person of rest who was busy in places of instruction. He
came forward and spoke the word as a teacher. Those wise in their own eyes
came to test him, but he refuted them, for they were foolish, and they hated him
because they were not really wise.
    After them came the little children, who have knowledge of the Father. When
they gained strength and learned about the expressions of the Father, they knew,
they were known, they were glorified, they gave glory.

[문단 5] The Living Book Is Revealed (19, 34–21, 25)
In their hearts the living book of the living was revealed, the book that was
written in the Father’s thought and mind and was,  since the foundation of
the All, in his incomprehensible nature. No one had been able to take up this
book, since it was ordained that the one who would take it up would be slain.
And nothing could appear among those who believed in salvation unless that
book had come out.
    For this reason the merciful, faithful Jesus was patient and accepted his
sufferings to the point of taking up that book, since he knew that his death would
be life for many.
    As in the case of a will that has not been opened, the fortune of the deceased
owner of the house is hidden, so also in the case of all that had been hidden
while the Father of the All was invisible but that issues from him from whom
every realm comes.

      Jesus appeared,
      put on that book,
      was nailed to a tree,
      and published the Father’s edict on the cross.
      Oh, what a great teaching!
      He humbled himself even unto death,
      though clothed in eternal life.
      He stripped off the perishable rags
      and clothed himself in incorruptibility,
      which no one can take from him.

When he entered the empty ways of fear, he passed by those stripped by
forgetfulness. For he encompasses knowledge and perfection, and he proclaims
what is in the heart …. [He] teaches those who will learn. And those who
will learn are the living who are inscribed in the book of the living. They learn
about themselves, receiving instruction from the Father, returning to him.
    Since the perfection of the All is in the Father, all must go up to him. When
all have received knowledge, they receive what is theirs and draw it to
themselves. For those who are ignorant are in need, and their need is great,
because they need what would make them perfect. Since the perfection of the All
is in the Father, all must go up to him and receive what is theirs. He inscribed
these things first, having prepared them to be given to those who came from him.

[문단 6] The Father Utters the Names of People Who Know (21, 25–23, 17)
Those whose names he knew at the beginning were called at the end, as it is with
every person who has knowledge. Such names the Father has uttered. One whose
name has not been spoken is ignorant, for how could a person hear if that
person’s name had not been pronounced? Whoever remains ignorant until the
end is a creature of forgetfulness and will perish with it. Otherwise why do these
wretches have no  name, why no voice?
    So whoever has knowledge is from above. If called, that person hears,
replies, turns to the one who is calling, and goes up to him. He knows how he is
called. That person has knowledge and does the will of him who called. That
person wishes to please him, finds rest, and has the appropriate name. Those
who have knowledge in this way know where they come from and where they
are going. They know as one who, having become intoxicated, has turned from
his drunkenness and, having come to his senses, has gotten control of himself.
    He has brought many back from Error. He went before them to the places
from which they had turned when they followed Error, because of the depth of
him who surrounds every place, though nothing surrounds him. Indeed, it is
amazing that they were in the Father without knowing him and that they could
leave on their own, since they were not able to contemplate or know the one in
whom they were.
    For if his will had not come from him…he revealed it as knowledge that is in
harmony with the expressions of his will—that is, knowledge of the living book,
which he revealed to the eternal realms at the end  as his [letters]. He
showed that they are not merely vowels or consonants, so that one may read
them and think them devoid of meaning. Rather, they are letters of truth; they
speak and know themselves. Each letter is a perfect truth like a perfect book,
for they are letters written in unity, written by the Father for the eternal realms,
so that by means of his letters they might come to know the Father.

[문단 7] The Word of the Father Appears (23, 17–25, 25)
      As for the Word,
      his wisdom meditates on it,
      his teaching utters it,
      his knowledge has revealed it,
      his patience is a crown upon it,
      his joy is in harmony with it,
      his glory has exalted it,
      his character has revealed it,
      his rest has received it,
      his love has incarnated it,
      his faith has embraced it.

   Thus the Father’s Word goes out in the All as the fruition  of his heart
and expression of his will. It supports all and chooses all. It also takes the
expression of all and purifies it, bringing it back to the Father, to the Mother,
Jesus of infinite sweetness.
    The Father opens his bosom, and his bosom is the Holy Spirit. He reveals his
hidden self, and his hidden self is his Son, so that through the Father’s mercy the
eternal realms may know him, end their wearying search for the Father, and rest
in him, knowing that he is rest. For he has filled what was deficient and has done
away with its appearance. The mere appearance of what was deficient is the
world, and mere appearance serves in the world.
    For where there is envy and strife there is deficiency, but where there is unity
there is completeness. Since deficiency came about because the Father was not
known, from the moment when the Father is known, deficiency will cease to be.
As one’s ignorance about another vanishes when one gains knowledge, and as
darkness departs when light comes,  so also deficiency disappears in
completeness. From then on the world of appearance will no longer be evident,
but rather it will disappear in the harmony of unity.
    Now the works of all lie scattered. In time unity will make the heavenly
places complete, and in unity all individually will come to themselves. By means
of knowledge they will purify themselves from multiplicity into unity, devouring
matter within themselves like fire, darkness by light, death by life.
    Since these things have happened to each of us, it is right for us to see to it
above all that this house be holy and silent for the sake of unity.

[문단 8] Parable of the Broken Jars (25, 25–26, 27)
This is like people who moved from one house to another. They had jars around
that were not good, and they broke, but the owner suffered no loss. Rather, the
owner was glad because instead of these defective jars there were full jars that
were perfect.
    This is the judgment that has come  from above and has judged every
person, a drawn two-edged sword cutting on this side and that, since the Word
that is in the heart of those who speak the Word appeared. It is not merely a
sound but it was embodied.
    A great disturbance occurred among the jars, for some were empty and
others were filled, some were ample and others were depleted, some were
purified and others were broken.
    All the realms were shaken and disturbed, for they had no order or stability.
Error was agitated, and she did not know what to do. She was troubled, she
lamented, she attacked herself, because she knew nothing. For knowledge,
which leads to the destruction of Error and all her expressions, approached.
Error is empty; there is nothing within her.

[문단 9] The Appearance of Truth and the Emanations of the Father (26, 27–28, 32)
Truth appeared, and all its expressions recognized it. They greeted the Father in
truth and power that is complete and joins them with the Father.
    Whoever loves truth, whoever touches  truth, touches the Father’s
mouth, because truth is the Father’s mouth. His tongue is the Holy Spirit, and
from his tongue one will receive the Holy Spirit. This is the manifestation of the
Father and his revelation to his eternal realms. He revealed his hidden self and
explained it. For who has anything within if not the Father alone?
    All the realms are from him. They know that they have come from him as
children who were within a mature person but who knew that they had not yet
received form or been given a name. The Father brings forth each of them when
they receive the essence of his knowledge. Otherwise, though they were in him,
they could not know him. The Father is perfect, and he knows every realm
within himself. If he wishes, what he wishes appears when he gives it form and a
name—and he does give it a name. He brings into being those who before
coming into being were ignorant of the one who made them.
    I am not saying that those who have not yet come to be are nothing. They
are  within one who may wish that they come into being if at some future
point he so wishes. On the one hand, he knows, before anything appears, what he
will produce. On the other hand, the fruit that has not yet appeared knows
nothing and does nothing. Thus each realm in the Father comes from what is, but
what has set itself up is from what is not. For whatever has no root has no fruit,
and although thinking, “I have come into being,” it will perish by itself. So
whatever does not exist will never exist.
    What, then, does he want such a one to think? It is this: “I have come into
being like shadows and phantoms of the night.” When the light shines, the
person knows the terror that had been experienced was nothing.

[문단 10] Ignorance Is a Nightmare (28, 32–30, 23)
Thus they were ignorant of the Father, for they did not see him.  Since there
had been terror and confusion and uncertainty and doubt and division, there were
many illusions among them, and inane ignorance—as if they were fast asleep
and found themselves a prey to nightmares. In these dreams they are fleeing
somewhere, or they cannot get away when chased, or they are in a fight, or they
themselves are beaten, or they are falling from on high, or they fly through the
air with no wings. Or it seems people are trying to kill them, though there is no
one chasing them, or they are killing their neighbors and are covered with their
blood. This continues until those experiencing all these dreams wake up. Those
caught in the middle of all these confusing things see nothing because the
dreams are nothing.
    So it is with those who cast off ignorance from themselves like sleep. They
do not consider it to be anything, nor do they regard its  features as real, but
they put them aside like a dream in the night and understand the knowledge of
the Father to be the dawn. This is how each person acts while in ignorance, as if
asleep, and this is how a person comes to knowledge, as if awakened. Good for
one who comes to himself and awakens. And blessed is one who has opened the
eyes of the blind.
    The spirit came to this person in haste when the person awakened. Having
given its hand to the one lying prone on the ground, the spirit placed him firmly
on his feet, for he had not yet risen.

[문단 11] The Beloved Son Reveals What Is New (30, 23–31, 35)
Knowledge of the Father and the revelation of his Son gave them the means of
knowing. For when they saw and heard him, he let them taste him and smell him
and touch the beloved Son. He appeared, informing them of the Father, the
illimitable, and he inspired them with what is in the thought, doing his will.
Many received the light and turned  to him. But material people were
strangers to him and did not discern his appearance or recognize him. For he
came in the likeness of flesh, and nothing blocked his way, for incorruptibility
cannot be grasped. Moreover, while saying new things and speaking about what
is in the Father’s heart, he produced the faultless Word. Light spoke through his
mouth and his voice brought forth life. He gave them thought and understanding
and mercy and salvation and the spirit of strength from the Father’s infinity and
sweetness. He made punishments and afflictions cease, for they caused those in
need of mercy to stray from him in error and bondage. He destroyed them with
might and confounded them with knowledge.

      He became a way for those who strayed,
      knowledge for those who were ignorant,
      discovery for those who sought,
      support for those who tremble,
      purity for those who were defiled.

[문단 12] Parables of Sheep (31, 35–32, 37)
He is the shepherd who left behind the ninety-nine  sheep that had not
strayed and went in search of the one that was lost. He rejoiced when he found
it. For ninety-nine is a number expressed with the left hand, but when another
one is found, the numerical sum is transferred to the right hand. In this way what
needs one more—that is, the whole right hand—attracts what it needs, takes it
from the left and brings it to the right, and so the number becomes one
hundred. This is the meaning of the pronunciation of these numbers.
     The Father is like that. He labored even on the Sabbath for the sheep that he
found fallen into the pit. He saved the life of the sheep and brought it up from
the pit.
     Understand the inner meaning, for you are children of inner meaning. What
is the Sabbath? It is a day on which salvation should not be idle. Speak of the
heavenly day that has no night and of the light that does not set because it is
perfect. Speak from the heart, for you are the perfect day and within you dwells
the light that does not fail. Speak of truth with those who seek it and of
knowledge with those who have sinned in their error.

[문단 13] Do the Father’s Will (33, 1–32)
Steady the feet of those who stumble and extend your hands to the sick. Feed the
hungry and give rest to the weary. Awaken those who wish to arise and rouse
those who sleep, for you embody vigorous understanding. If what is strong acts
like this, it becomes even stronger.
    Focus your attention upon yourselves. Do not focus your attention upon
other things—that is, what you have cast away from yourselves. Do not return to
eat what you have vomited. Do not be moth-eaten, do not be worm-eaten, for
you have already gotten rid of that. Do not be a place for the devil, for you have
already destroyed him. Do not strengthen what stands in your way, what is
collapsing, to support it. One who is lawless is nothing. Treat the lawless one
more harshly than the just one, for the lawless does what he does because he is
lawless, but the just does what he does with people because he is righteous. Do
the Father’s will, then, for you are from him.

[문단 14] The Sweetness of the Father (33, 33–34, 34)
For the Father is sweet, and goodness is in his will. He knows what is yours, in
which you find rest. By the fruit one knows what is yours. For the Father’s
children  are his fragrance; they are from the beauty of his face. The Father
loves his fragrance and disperses it everywhere, and when it mixes with matter,
it gives his fragrance to the light. Through his quietness he makes his fragrance
superior in every way to every sound. For it is not ears that smell the fragrance,
but it is the spirit that possesses the sense of smell, draws the fragrance to itself,
and immerses itself in the Father’s fragrance. Thus it cares for it and takes it to
where it came from, the original fragrance, which has grown cold in psychical
form. It is like cold water that has sunk into soft soil, and those who see it think
there is only soil. Later the water evaporates when the wind draws it up, and it
becomes warm. So cold fragrances are from division.
    For this reason faith came, did away with division, and brought the warm
fullness of love, so that what is cold may not return, but the unity of perfect
thought may prevail.

[문단 15] The Father Restores Fullness (34, 34–36, 35)
This <is> the Word of the gospel about the discovery of fullness, for those who
await  salvation coming from above. Their hope, for which they are waiting,
is in waiting, and this is their image, the light in which there is no shadow. At
this time the fullness is about to come. Deficiency of matter is not from the
infinity of the Father, who came to give time to deficiency. In fact, it is not right
to say that the incorruptible would actually come in this manner. The Father’s
depth is profound, and the thought of error is not with him. It is something that
has fallen, and something that can readily be set upright through the discovery of
the one who has come to what he would restore.
    This restoration is called repentance. The reason that the incorruptible
breathed out and followed after the one who sinned was so that the sinner might
find rest. Forgiveness is what remains for the light in deficiency, the Word of
fullness. For a doctor rushes to where there is sickness, since that is the doctor’s
wish. The person in need does not hide it, because the doctor has what the
patient needs. Thus fullness, which has no deficiency but fills up deficiency,
is provided to fill a person’s need, so that the person may receive grace. While
deficient, the person had no grace, and because of this a diminishing took place
where there was no grace. When the diminished part was restored, the person in
need was revealed as fullness. This is what it means to discover the light of truth
that has shone toward a person: it is unchangeable.
    Because of the coming of Christ it was said openly, “Seek, and the troubled
will be restored, and he will anoint them with ointment.” The ointment is the
mercy of the Father, who will have mercy on them, and those anointed are the
perfect. For filled jars are usually sealed with wax. But when the seal of a jar is
broken, it may leak, and the cause of its defect is the lack of a seal. For then a
breath of wind and the power that it has can make it evaporate. But on the jar
that is without defect the seal is not broken, nor does it leak, and the perfect
Father fills again what it lacks.

[문단 16] The Father Knows His Plants in Paradise (36, 35–38, 6)
He is good. He knows his plants because he planted them in his paradise. And
his paradise is his place of rest. Paradise  is the perfection within the Father’s
thought, and the plants are the words of his meditation. Each of his words is the
product of his will and the revelation of his speech. Since they were the depth of
his thought, the Word that came forth caused them to appear, along with mind
that speaks the Word, and silent grace. It was called thought, because they
dwelled in silent grace before being revealed. So it happened that the Word
came forth when it was pleasing to the will of him who willed it.
    The Father is at rest in will. Nothing happens without his pleasure; nothing
happens without the Father’s will. And his will is incomprehensible. His will is
his footprint, but none can understand him, nor does he exist so that they might
study him in order to grasp him. Rather, when he wills, what he wills is this,
even if the view does not please people before God: it is the Father’s will. For he
knows the beginning and the end of all, and at their end he will greet them. The
end is the recognition of him who is hidden, and he is the Father,  from
whom the beginning has come and to whom all will return who have come from
him. They have appeared for the glory and joy of his name.

[문단 17] The Father’s Name Is Revealed (38, 6–41, 3)
The Name of the Father is the Son. In the beginning he gave a name to the one
who came from him, while he remained the same, and he conceived him as a
Son. He gave him his Name, which belonged to him. All that exists with the
Father belongs to him. He has the Name; he has the Son. The Son can be seen,
but the Name is invisible, for it alone is the mystery of the invisible, which
comes to ears completely filled with it through his agency. Yet the Father’s
Name is not pronounced; it is revealed through a Son, and the Name is great.
    Who then can utter his Name, the great Name, except him alone to whom the
Name belongs, and the children of the Name, on whom the Father’s Name rests,
and who themselves rest on his Name? Since the Father has no beginning, he
alone conceived it for himself as a name before he created the eternal realms,
that the Father’s Name might be supreme over them. This is the  true Name,
which is confirmed by his authority in perfect power. This Name does not derive
from ordinary words or name giving, for it is invisible.
    He alone gave him a name, because he alone saw him and he alone could
name him. One who does not exist has no name, for what name would someone
give to one who does not exist? One who exists exists with his name. He alone
knows it, and to him alone he has given a name. This is the Father, and his
Name is the Son. He did not hide it within, but it was in existence, and the Son
himself disclosed the Name. The Name, then, belongs to the Father, just as the
Father’s Name is the beloved Son. Otherwise where would he find a name
except from the Father?
    But someone may say to an acquaintance, “Who could give a name to
someone who existed before himself? Do not children receive their names
from their parents?” First, we should consider this point: what is a name? This is
the true Name, the Name from the Father, and this is the proper Name. He did
not receive the Name on loan, as is the case with others, who receive names that
are made up. This is the proper Name, and there is no one else who gave it to
him. He is unnamable, indescribable, until the time when the perfect one spoke
of him, for the perfect one alone is able to pronounce his Name and see him.
    When it was pleasing to him that his Son should be his pronounced Name,
and when he who came from the depth disclosed this Name, he divulged what
was hidden, for he knew that the Father is free of evil. That is why he brought
him forth, so that he might speak about the place from which he had come and
his place of rest,  and that he might glorify the fullness, the majesty of his
Name, and the Father’s sweetness.

[문단 18] The Place of Rest (41, 3–43, 24)
All will speak individually about where they have come from and how they were
established in the place of rest. They will hasten to return and receive from that
place, the place where they stood once before, and they will taste of that place,
be nourished, and grow.
    Their own place of rest is their fullness. All the emanations from the Father
are fullnesses, and all his emanations find their root in the one who caused them
all to grow from himself. He assigned their destinies. They all appear so that
through their own thought [they might be perfected]. For the place to which
they extend their thought is their root, which lifts them up through all the heights
to the Father.
    They embrace his head, which is rest for them, and they hold him close so
that, in a manner of speaking, they have caressed his face with kisses. But they
do not make  this obvious. For they neither exalt themselves nor diminish
the Father’s glory. And they do not think of him as insignificant or bitter or
angry, but as free of evil, unperturbed, sweet, knowing all the heavenly places
before they came into being, and having no need of instruction.
     Such are those who possess something of this immeasurable majesty from
above, as they await that unique and perfect One who is a Mother to them. And
they do not go down to the underworld, nor do they have envy or groaning, nor
is death with them. They rest in one who rests, and they are not weary or
confused about truth.
     They are truth. The Father is in them and they are in the Father, perfect,
inseparable from him who is truly good. They lack nothing at all but are at rest,
fresh in spirit. They will hearken to their root and be involved with concerns in
which they may find their root and do no harm to their souls.
     Such is the place of the blessed, such is their place. As for the others, let
them know, in their own places, that I should not  say more, for I have been
in the place of rest. There I shall dwell, to devote myself, constantly, to the
Father of the All and the true brothers and sisters, upon whom the Father’s love
is lavished, and in whose midst nothing of him is lacking. They appear in truth
dwelling in true and eternal life, and they speak of the perfect light filled with
the Father’s seed, which is in his heart and in the fullness. His spirit rejoices in
this and glorifies him in whom it was. For he is good, and his children are
perfect and worthy of his Name. Children like this the Father loves.
