[문단 1] The Letter to Rheginus (43, 25–44, 3)
Rheginus my son, some people want to become intellectuals. That is their goal
when they try to explain unsolved problems, and if they are successful, they
have an exalted opinion of themselves. I do not think they are established on the
word of truth. Rather, they seek their own rest, which we have received from
Christ our Savior and Lord. We received rest when we came to know the
truth and rested on it.
Since you ask about the main issues on resurrection in such a pleasant way, I
am writing to you. Resurrection is essential. Many do not believe in it and few
find it, so let us discuss it in our treatise.

[문단 2] Christ as Son of God and Son of Humanity (44, 3–39)
How did the Lord live his life? While he was in flesh and after he
revealed himself as Son of God, he went about in this world where you live and
spoke about the law of nature, which I call death. Rheginus, the Son of God was
a son of humanity. He embraced both aspects, humanity and divinity, so that by
being a son of God he might conquer death, and by being a son of humanity
fullness might be restored. For originally he was from above, a seed of truth,
before the structure of the world, with all its dominions and deities, came into
being.

[문단 3] The Resurrection of Christ (44, 39–45, 23)
I know I am presenting this explanation in difficult terms, but there is
nothing in the word of truth that is difficult. Christ came to provide the
explanation, to leave nothing hidden, but to reveal everything clearly about
coming into being, the destruction of evil, and the revelation of the chosen. This
means the emergence of truth and spirit, and grace belongs to truth.
The Savior swallowed death. You must know this. When he laid aside the
perishable world, he exchanged it for an incorruptible eternal realm. He arose
and swallowed the visible through the invisible, and thus he granted us the way

to our immortality.

[문단 4] The Resurrection of the Believer (45, 23–46, 2)
As the apostle said of him, we
suffered with him, we arose with him, we ascended with him.
Since we are visibly present in this world, we wear the garment of the world.
From the Savior we radiate like beams of light, and we are sustained by him
until our sunset, our death in this life. We are drawn upward by him, like rays by
the sun, and nothing holds us down. This is the resurrection of the spirit,
which swallows the resurrection of the soul and the resurrection of the flesh.

[문단 5] Philosophers and Believers (46, 3–19)
If some do not believe, they cannot be persuaded. My son, the affirmation that
the dead will arise belongs to the realm of faith, not of argument.
Among the world’s philosophers is there one who believes? Certainly that
philosopher will arise. But that philosopher should not trust anyone who turns to
himself alone, even for our faith.
We know the Son of Humanity, and we believe that he arose from the dead.
We say of him, “He became death’s destroyer.”

[문단 6] Thought and Mind Will Not Perish (46, 19–47, 1)
The object of belief is great and the believers are also great. The
thought of believers will not perish and the mind of those who know will not
perish. We are chosen for salvation and redemption, since from the beginning it
was determined that we would not fall into the folly of the ignorant, but we
would enter into the understanding of those who know the truth.
The truth they guard cannot be lost. Nor will it be. The system of the
Fullness is strong; what broke loose and became the world is insignificant. What
is held fast is the All. It did not come into being. It was.

[문단 7] Flesh and Spirit (47, 1–30)
So never doubt the resurrection, Rheginus my son. Although once you did not
exist in flesh, you took on flesh when you entered this world. Why is it, then,
that you will not take your flesh with you when you ascend into the eternal
realm? What is better than flesh is what animates the flesh. What came into
being because of you, isn’t it yours? If it is yours, doesn’t it exist with you?
But while you are in the world, what are you missing? Is that what you have

attempted to learn about: the outflow of the body, which is old age? Are you
nothing but corruption?
Leaving this behind will profit you, for you will not give up the better part
when you leave. The inferior part will suffer loss, but there is grace for it.
Nothing redeems us from this world, but we are of the All, and we are saved. We
have been saved from start to finish. Let us think about it in this way; let us
accept it in this way.

[문단 8] What Is the Resurrection? (47, 30–48, 19)
Some inquire further and want to know whether one will be saved immediately,
if the body is left behind. Let there be no doubt about this. Surely the visible
parts of the body are dead and will not be saved. Only the living parts that
are within will arise.
What is the resurrection? It is always the disclosure of those who have
arisen. If you remember reading in the gospel that Elijah and Moses appeared
with Jesus, do not think that the resurrection is an illusion. It is no illusion. It is
truth. It is more appropriate to say that the world is illusion rather than the
resurrection that came into being through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

[문단 9] Reality and Illusion (48, 19–49, 9)
What am I telling you?
All at once the living die.
How do they live in illusion?
The rich become poor,
kings are overthrown,
everything changes.
The world is illusion.
Let me not speak so negatively.
The resurrection is different.
It is real,
it stands firm.
It is revelation of what is,
a transformation of things,
a transition into newness.
Incorruptibility [flows] over corruption, light flows over darkness,
swallowing it,
Fullness fills what it lacks.

These are symbols and images of resurrection.
This brings goodness.

[문단 10] Resurrection Is Already Here (49, 9–37)
Rheginus, do not get lost in details, nor live according to the flesh for the sake of
harmony. Flee from divisions and bonds, and then you already have
resurrection. If the mortal part knows itself, knows that it will die even though
it has lived many years in this life, why not look at yourself and see that you
already have arisen and have been received in?
You have the resurrection but go on as if you are to die when it is that mortal
part that knows it is dead. Why am I so patient? Only because of your lack of
training. Everyone needs to practice ways to be released from this element so as
not to wander in error, but rather to recover what one was at the beginning.

[문단 11] Conclusion (49, 37–50, 18)
What I received through the generosity of my Lord Jesus Christ I have
taught you and your brothers and sisters, who are my children, about them, and I
have left out nothing that may strengthen you. If anything in the explanation of
the treatise is too deep, ask and I shall clarify it.
Do not be worried about sharing this treatise with anyone among you, for it
can be helpful. Many are awaiting what I have written to you. I say, peace and
grace be with them.
I greet you and those who love you with the love of family.
The Treatise on Resurrection
