[문단 1] Introduction (51, 1–8)
In order to be able to speak about exalted things, it is necessary that we begin
with the Father, who is the root of the All and from whom we have obtained
grace to speak about him. For he existed before anything else had come into
being except him alone.

[문단 2] The Father (51, 8–54, 35)
The Father is singular while being many. For he is first and he is unique, though
without being solitary. How else could he be a father? For from the word
“father” it follows that there is a “son.” That singular one who is the only Father
is in fact like a tree that has a trunk, branches, and fruit.
Of him it may be said that he is a true father, incomparable and immutable,
because he is truly singular and God. For no one is god for him and no one is
father to him—he has not been born—and no other has brought him into being.
For whoever is the father of somebody, or his maker, himself has a father and a
maker in turn. It is certainly possible that he may become the father and the
maker of whoever comes into being from him and is made by him; still, he is not
a father in the true sense or a god, insofar as  someone has given [birth to
him and] has brought him into being. The only Father and God in the true sense,
therefore, <is> the one who has been born by no one, but who, on the contrary,
has given birth to the All and has brought it into being.
He is without beginning and without end. For not only is he without end—
being unborn makes him immortal as well—but he is also unchangeable in his
eternal being, in that which he is, in that which makes him immutable and that
which makes him great. He does not move himself away from what he is, nor
can anyone else force him against his will to cease being what he is. For no one
has made him what he is.
Therefore neither does he change himself, nor will another be able to move

him from that in which he is, from what he is, from his way of being, or from his
greatness—thus he cannot be moved, nor is it possible for another to change him
into a different form, either by reducing him or changing him or making him
less. For this is truly and veritably <how> he is unchangeable and immutable,
being clothed in immutability. Thus he is called “without beginning” and
“without end,” not only because he is unborn and immortal, but also because,
just as he is without beginning, he is also without end. In his manner of being he
is incomprehensible  in his greatness, inscrutable in his wisdom, invincible
in his might, and unfathomable in his sweetness.
In the true sense he alone, the good, unborn, and perfect Father who lacks
nothing, is complete—filled with everything he possesses, excellent and
precious qualities of every kind. Moreover, he has no envy, which means that all
he owns he gives away, without being affected and suffering no loss by his gifts.
For he is rich from the things he gives away and finds rest in what he graciously
bestows.
Therefore, his manner, his form, and his greatness are such that nothing else
exists beside him from the beginning—neither a place in which he dwells, from
which he has gone forth, or to which he will return; nor an original form that he
used as a model for his work; nor fatigue that came over him as a result of what
he did; nor matter that lay before him and from which he made the things that he
made; nor a substance inside him and from which he brought forth the things he
brought forth; nor a collaborator with whom he collaborated on the things that he
created. To speak in such a way is ignorant. Rather, he himself, being good,
lacking nothing, perfect,  and complete, is everything.
There is no name that suits him among those that may be conceived, spoken,
seen, or grasped, however brilliant, exalted, or glorious. It is, to be sure, possible
to speak such names in order to glorify and praise him, to the extent of the
capacity of whoever wants to give glory. But the way he is in himself, his own
manner of being—that no mind can conceive, no word express, no eye see, and
no body touch, so incomprehensible is his greatness, so unfathomable his depth,
so immeasurable his exaltedness, and so boundless his <extension>.
Such is the nature of the unborn one. He does not get to work starting from
something other than himself, nor does he have a partner—this would imply a
limitation. But he has such an existence that he has neither figure nor form that
can be perceived by the senses. This means that he is incomprehensible as well;
and if he is incomprehensible, it follows that he is unknowable.

[문단 3] The Generation of the Son (54, 35–57, 23)
Being inconceivable for any thought, invisible for any thing, unutterable for any
word, and untouchable for any hand, only he himself knows himself the way he
 is, with his form and his greatness and his magnitude, and only he is able to
conceive himself, name himself, and grasp himself. For he, the inconceivable,
ineffable, incomprehensible, and unchangeable one, is mind for himself, eye for
himself, mouth for himself, and form for himself, and it is also himself that he
conceives, sees, speaks, and grasps. That which he conceives, sees, and speaks is
nourishment and delight, truth, joy, and rest, and that which he thinks surpasses
every wisdom, excels every mind, excels every glory, excels every beauty and
every sweetness, every greatness, every depth, and every exaltedness.
Now, although he is unknowable in his nature and possesses all those
supreme qualities I have described, he is nevertheless able, if he so desires, to
grant knowledge in order that he may be known, out of his abundant sweetness.
He possesses power, which is his will. For the moment, however, he holds
himself back in silence, he who is the greatest, being the cause of the generation
of the members of the All into eternal existence.
For it is truly his ineffable self that he engenders. It is self-generation, where
he conceives of himself and knows himself as he is. He brings forth something
worthy of the admiration, glory, praise, and honor that belong to himself,
through his boundless greatness, his inscrutable wisdom, his immeasurable
power, and his sweetness that is beyond tasting. It is he himself whom he puts
forth in this manner of generation, and who receives glory and praise, admiration
and love, and it is also he who gives himself glory, admiration, praise, and love.
This he has as a Son dwelling in him, keeping silent about him, and this is the
ineffable within the ineffable, the invisible, the ungraspable, the inconceivable
within the inconceivable.
This is how he exists eternally within himself. As we have explained, by
knowing himself in himself the Father bore him without generation, so that he
exists by the Father having him as a thought—that is, his thought about himself,
his sensation  of himself and…of his eternal being. This is what in truth is
meant by “Silence”—or “Wisdom,”5 or “Grace,” as the latter is also rightly
called.
Just as the Father truly is one before whom no [other existed] and after
[whom] there is no other unborn one, in the [same] way [the Son] as well is truly
one before whom no other son existed and after whom there is no other. For that
reason he is a firstborn and an only son—firstborn because there was no one
before him, and the only son because there is no one after him.

[문단 4] The Preexistent Church (57, 23–59, 38)
Moreover, he has his fruit, though it remained unknown because of his
overwhelming greatness. And he wished to make it known, because of his
abundant sweetness. He revealed his inscrutable power, and he mixed it with the
plentiful abundance of his generosity. For not only the Son but also the Church
exists from the beginning.
If somebody now thinks that this statement is contradicted by the fact that
the Son is an only son, that is not so, because of the mystery of the matter. For
just as  the Father is singular, and was shown to be his own father, so also
the Son may be found to be his own brother, without generation and without
beginning. It is himself that the Father admires [as] Father and to [whom] he
gives [glory], praise, and [love], and it is equally himself that he conceives of as
Son, in accordance with the qualities “without beginning” and “without end.”
This is how the matter is, being firmly established.
His offspring, the ones who are, are without number and limit and at the
same time indivisible. They have issued from him, the Son and the Father, in the
same way as kisses, when two people abundantly embrace one another in a good
and insatiable thought—it is a single embrace but consists of many kisses. This
is the Church that consists of many people and exists before the aeons and is
justly called “the aeons of the aeons.” This is the nature of these holy
imperishable spirits upon which the Son rests since it is his essence, just as the
Father rests  upon the Son…the Church exists in the properties and qualities
in which the Father and the Son exist and which I have described earlier. Thus it
consists of innumerable births of aeons, and these in turn give birth in infinite
number through the qualities and properties in which they [exist]. These [are a]
community [formed] with one another and [with the ones] who have gone forth
from [them and] with the Son, because of whom they exist as glory.
For this reason no mind can conceive of <them>—such is the perfection of
that place—nor can words speak of them. For they are ineffable, unnamable, and
inconceivable. Only they are able to name themselves in order to conceive of
themselves. For they are not rooted here below. Those who belong to that place
are ineffable and innumerable, in accordance with the special structure that this
is. And <this is the form> and the manner, and this is the kind, the joy, and the
delight of the nameless, unnamable, inconceivable, invisible, and ungraspable
unborn one. It is the Fullness of his fatherhood whereby his abundance becomes
procreation.

[문단 5] The All Before It Was Brought Forth (60, 1–61, 1)
…of the aeons existed eternally in the Father’s Thought, and he was like a
thought and a place for them. And once it was decided that they should be born,
he who possesses all power desired to take and bring what was incomplete out
of…those who [were within] him. But he is [as] he is, [for he is] a spring that is
not diminished by the water flowing from it.
As long as they remained in the Father’s Thought—that is, while they were
in the hidden depth—the Depth himself certainly knew them, but they on their
part were incapable of knowing the depth in which they found themselves, nor
could they know themselves or anything else. In other words, they existed with
the Father but did not exist for themselves. Rather, the kind of existence they had
was like that of a seed, or it may be compared with that of an embryo. He had
made them in the manner of the word, which exists in a seminal state before the
things it will bring forth have yet come into being.

[문단 6] The Father’s Plan (61, 1–62, 5)
For that reason the Father had also thought in advance that they should exist not
only for himself, but should exist for themselves as well—that they should
remain in [his] thought as mental substance, but also exist for themselves. He
sowed a thought as a seed of…in order that [they might] understand [what kind
of father] they have. He showed grace and [provided the] first form, that they
might [perceive] whom [they have] for a father. The Name of the Father he
granted them, by means of a voice calling out to them that he who is, is by that
Name, and possessing it, one comes into being. How exalted the Name was,
however, they did not realize. For as long as the infant is in the state of an
embryo, it has what it needs without ever having seen the one who sowed it. For
that reason, they had this only as an object to be sought after: they understood
that he existed and they desired to find out who the existing one might be.
But the Father is good and perfect, and just as he did not <close> himself to
them so that they should remain forever in his Thought, but granted that they
should come into being for themselves also, in the same way he would
gracefully allow them to understand who the One Who Is is—that is, the one
who knows himself eternally. …receive form in order [to know] who the
One Who Is is, in the same way as when one is brought forth here below: when
one is born, one finds oneself in the light and is able to see one’s parents.

[문단 7] The All Is Not Made Perfect from the Beginning (62, 6–33)
For the Father produced the All like a little child, like a drop from a spring, like
a blossom from a [vine], like a…, like a shoot…, so that they needed
[nourishment], growth, and perfection. He withheld the perfection for a time.
Having kept it in his mind from the beginning, he possesses it from the
beginning and looks at it, but he <concealed> it for those who had come forth
from him. This was not out of jealousy, but it was in order that the aeons should
not receive their perfection from the beginning and thereby exalt themselves in
glory as equal to the Father and think that they had achieved this perfection out
of themselves. But just as they came into existence because it pleased him, so
also it was because it pleased him that he benevolently granted them a perfect
thought that would make them faultless.

[문단 8] The Father Reveals Himself in the Son Through the Hymns of the Mind (62, 33–63, 28)
That which he now made to rise like a light for those who had gone forth from
himself, that by which they are given a name, that is the Son, the full and
faultlessly perfect one. The Father brought him forth while he remained united
with the one from whom he had gone forth, …receiving glory together…the
All, according [to the ability] of each one to receive [him]. This is not yet his
greatness that they have received; rather, he exists only partially in the manner,
the form, and the greatness that he is. For they are able to see him and to speak
with regard to [what they] know about him—since they carry him and he carries
them—and they are able to reach [him] as well, though [he] remains the way he
is, the inimitable one, in order that the Father may be glorified by each and every
one and reveal himself. And being hidden and invisible in his ineffability, he is
admired in the mind.
For this reason his great exaltedness can be revealed when they speak about
him and see him, gratefully singing hymns to him about his abundant sweetness.

[문단 9] The Ability of the Aeons to Procreate (63, 29–64, 27)
<…> and just as the marvels of silence are eternal births—births of mind—so
also the faculties of the word are spiritual emissions. Since they both belong to
the word,  they are…and thoughts that are given birth by it, eternally living
roots that have been manifested. For they are births that have issued from them,
minds and spiritual births for the glory of the Father.
And there is no need of a voice, since they [are] spirits of mind and word,
nor is there any need to perform [an action] for what they desire to [do], but in

the same manner that [the Father] exists, so do [those] who have issued from
him also bring forth all that they wish. And that which they think, that which
they say, that which they move toward, that which they are in, and that which
they sing as hymns, giving glory, he has as son<s>. For this is their power of
giving birth, as with the ones from whom they have gone forth: by mutual help,
for they have been helping one another in the same way as those unborn.

[문단 10] The Distinction Between the Father and the Son (64, 28–66, 5)
Now the Father, insofar as he is elevated above the members of the All, is
unknowable and incomprehensible. His greatness is so immense that if he had
revealed himself at once and suddenly, even the highest of the aeons that have
gone forth from him would have perished. For that reason he withheld his power
and his impassibility in that in which he  is, [remaining] ineffable and
unnamable, transcending all mind and all speech.
He, on the other hand, extended himself and spread himself out. It is he who
gave firmness, location, and a dwelling place to the All—according to one of his
names he is in fact “Father of the All”15—through his constant suffering on their
behalf, having sown in their minds the idea that they should seek what exceeds
their…, by making them perceive that he is and thus making them seek what he
might be. He was given them as delight and nourishment, joy and abundant
illumination, and this is his compassion, the knowledge he provides, and his
union with them. And this is he who is called, and who is, the Son. He is the sum
of the All, and they have understood who he is, and he is clothed.
On the other hand, that is the one by reason of whom he is called “Son,” the
one about whom they perceive that he exists and that they have been seeking
him. This is the one who exists as Father, and of whom one can neither speak nor
think: he is the one who exists first. For no one can conceive of him, or think of
him, or draw near to that place, toward the exalted, toward the truly preexistent.
But every name that is thought  or spoken about him is brought forth in
glorification as a trace of him, according to the capacity of each one of those
who give him glory.

[문단 11] The Son as the Name and the Names of the Father (66, 5–67, 34)
He, however, whose light dawned from him, stretching himself out to give birth
and knowledge to the members of the All, he is all these names without
falsehood, and he truly is the Father’s only first Man. This is the one I [call] the

form of the formless, the body of the incorporeal, the face of the invisible, the
word of the inexpressible, the mind of the inconceivable, the spring that flowed
from him, the root of those who have been rooted, the god of those who are
ready, the light of those he illuminates, the will of those he has willed, the
providence of those for whom he provides, the wisdom of those he has made
wise, the strength of those he has given strength, the assembly <of> those with
whom he is present, the revelation of that which is sought after, the eye of those
who see, the spirit of those who breathe, the life of those who live, the unity of
those who are united.
While all the members of the All exist in the single one, as he clothes himself
completely, and in his single Name, he is never called by it. And in the same
unitary way they are simultaneously this single one as well as all of them. He is
not divided as a body, nor is he split apart by the names in which he exists in the
sense that this is one thing and that is  something [else; nor] does he change
by…, nor does he alter through the names in which he is, being now like this and
now something different, so that he would be one person now and someone else
at another time. Rather, he is entirely himself forever; [he is] each and every one
of the members of the All eternally at the same time. He is what all of them are,
as Father of the All, and the members of the All are the Father as well. For he is
himself knowledge for himself, and he is each one of his qualities and powers,
and <he is> himself the eye for all that he knows, seeing all of it in himself,
having a Son and form.
Thus, his powers and qualities are innumerable and inaudible because of the
way <in which> he gives birth to them. The births of his words, his commands,
and his members of the All are innumerable and indivisible. He knows them, for
they are himself. When they speak, they are all in the one single Name; and if he
brings them forth, it is in order that they may be found to exist as individual
qualities forming a unity.

[문단 12] The Aeons Procreate (67, 34–68, 36)
He did not, however, reveal his multiplicity at once to the members of the All,
nor did he reveal his sameness to those who had issued forth from him. Now, all
those who had gone forth from him—<that> is, the aeons of the aeons,
[being] emissions born of a procreative nature—also <procreate> through their
own procreative nature, to the glory of the Father, just as he had been the cause
of their existence. This is what we said earlier: he makes the aeons into roots and
springs and fathers. For that which they glorified, they bore. For it possesses
knowledge and wisdom, and they have understood that they have gone forth

from the knowledge and the understanding of the All.
If the members of the All had risen to give glory according to the individual
<powers> of each aeon, they would have brought forth a glory that was only a
semblance of the Father, who himself is the All. For that reason they were
drawn, through the singing of praise and through the power of the oneness of
him from whom they had come forth, into mutual intermingling, union, and
oneness. From their assembled fullness they offered a glorification worthy of the
Father, an image that was one and at the same time many because it was brought
forth for the glory of the One, and because they had come forward toward him
who himself is the entirety of the All.

[문단 13] The Three Fruits of Glorification (68, 36–70, 19)
This, then,  was a tribute from the [aeons] to the one who had brought forth
the All, a firstfruit offering of those who are immortal and eternal; for when it
issued from the living aeons, it left them perfect and full, caused by something
[perfect] and full, since they were full and perfect, having given glory in a
perfect manner in communion.
For inasmuch as the Father lacks nothing, he returns the glory they give to
those who glorify [him, so as to] make them manifest by what he himself is. The
cause that brought about for them the second glorification is in fact that which
was returned unto them from the Father, when they understood the grace from
the Father through which they had borne fruit with one another, so that just as
they had been bringing forth by glorifying the Father, in the same way they
might also themselves be made manifest in their act of giving glory, so as to be
revealed as being perfect.
They became fathers of the third glorification, which was produced in
accordance with the free will and the power they had been born with, enabling
them to give glory in unison while at the same time independently of one
another, according to the will of each. Thus both the first and the second
glorifications are perfect and full, for they are manifestations of the perfect and
full Father and of the perfect things that issued from the glorification of him who
is perfect. The fruit of the third glorification, however, is produced by the will of
each individual aeon and of each of the Father’s qualities and powers. This fruit
is  a perfect Fullness to [the extent] that what the aeons desire and are
capable of in giving glory to the Father comes from their union as well as from
each of them individually.
For this reason they exist as minds over minds, words over words, superiors
over superiors, degrees over degrees, being ranked one above the other. Each of

those who glorify has his own station, rank, dwelling place, and place of rest,
which is the glorification he brings forth.

[문단 14] The Harmony of the Aeons (70, 19–71, 7)
For those who glorify the Father all have their eternal offspring. They give birth
by way of mutual help, and their emissions are unlimited and immeasurable.
And no jealousy exists on the part of the Father toward those who have come
forth from him because they are producing something like himself and his
image; for it is he himself who is in the members of the All, giving birth and
revealing himself. Whomever he desires to make a father—he himself is their
Father; or a god—he himself is their God. And he makes into members of the
All the ones <for whom> he himself is the All.  In that place rightfully
belong all those good names that the angels and rulers who have come into being
in the world share as well, although the latter have nothing in common with the
eternal ones.

[문단 15] The Aeons Search for the Father (71, 7–35)
The whole structure of aeons, then, is yearning and seeking to find the Father
perfectly and completely, and this is their irreproachable union. Although the
Father does reveal himself, he did not want them to know him from eternity, but
he presented himself as something to be reflected upon and sought after, while
keeping for himself that by which he is inscrutably preexistent. For the Father
gave the aeons a starting point and a root, so that they are stations on the calm
road leading to him, as to a school of good conduct; for he spread out faith and
prayer for what they do not see, a firm hope in what they do not comprehend, a
fertile love longing for what they do not behold, an eternally receptive
understanding of the mind, a blessing that is richness and freedom, and, for their
thoughts, the wisdom of one whose desire is the glory of the Father.

[문단 16] The Spirit (71, 35–73, 18)
For the Father, the exalted one, they know  by his Will, which [is] the Spirit
that breathes through the members of the All and gives them a thought to search
for the unknown, just as somebody is moved by a fragrance to seek the source of
that fragrance—and the fragrance of the Father surpasses such unworthy
things. For its sweetness lets the aeons sense an indescribable pleasure, and
gives them the thought that they should be united with the one who desires that

they should know him in oneness, and that they should assist one another
through the spirit that is sown in them. They find themselves in a great and
powerful inbreathing where they are renewed in a speechless manner and are
formed, having no occasion to turn away through thoughtlessness from that in
which they are placed. For they do not speak but are silent about the glory of the
Father, about him who has the power to speak.
He manifested [himself], though he cannot be spoken. They have <him>
hidden in their thoughts; for that reason the aeons keep silent about the way the
Father exists in his form, his nature, and his greatness,  but they have
become worthy of knowing this through his Spirit. For he is unnamable and
inaccessible, but through his Spirit, which is the trace by which he may be
sought, he gives himself to them to be thought and spoken. For each of the aeons
is a name corresponding to each of the Father’s qualities and powers. Since he
exists in many names, it is by mingling and through mutual harmony that they
are able to speak of him, by means of a richness of speech. Thus, the Father is a
single Name because he is One, but nevertheless innumerable in his qualities and
names.

[문단 17] The Nature of the Emission (73, 18–74, 18)
The emission of the members of the All that comes from the One Who Is has
not taken place by way of a division, as if it were <a> separation from the one
who gave birth to them; rather, their birth has the form of a spreading out, by
which the Father spreads himself out into that which he wishes, in order that
[those] who have gone forth from him may be as well. For just as the present
aeon is single, yet divided into ages, ages into years, years into seasons, seasons
into months, months into days, days into hours, and hours into moments, in the
same way  the true aeon also is single yet multiple, being glorified by small
as well as by great names according to what each is able to comprehend. Or, to
use other similes, it is like a spring that remains what it is even if it flows into
rivers, lakes, streams, and canals; or like a root that spreads out into trees with
branches and fruits; or like a human body that is indivisibly divided into limbs
and limbs—main limbs and extremities, large ones and small.
Free Will, Wisdom, and the Collaboration of the Aeons

[문단 18] (74, 18–75, 17)
The aeons were brought forth according to the third fruit, by using the freedom
of the will and the wisdom the Father had graciously given them for their

thoughts. They do not desire to give glory [together with] that which the
individual Fullnesses may produce in unison as words of [glorification], nor do
they desire to give glory together with the All as a whole, nor does one desire to
do so together with another aeon who has already attained a higher level or
station than himself, without obtaining <what> has been desired from the one
who resides in that higher name and the higher station.  He receives him
with himself at that higher level, and the one who desired to ascend to him
engenders, as it were, himself, engendering himself through that other with what
he is, renewing himself with what has come to him from his brother, seeing him
and praying to him about this matter.
In order that this may happen, the one who has desired to give glory does not
say anything to him about it, except this only. For a Boundary to speech is
placed in the Fullness, making them keep silent about the Father’s
unreachability, but allowing them to speak about their desire to reach him.

[문단 19] The Presumption of the Youngest Aeon (75, 17–76, 23)
It came upon one of the aeons that he should undertake to reach the
inconceivability of the Father and to give glory to it as well as to his ineffability.
It was a Word belonging to the unity, [although] it was not one that arose out
of the union of the members of the All, nor from him who had brought them
forth—for he who has brought forth the All <is> the Father. For this aeon was
one of those who had been given wisdom, with ideas first existing independently
in his mind so as to be brought forth when he wanted it. Because of that, he had
received a natural wisdom enabling him to inquire into the hidden order, being a
fruit of wisdom. Thus, the free will with which the members of the All had been
born caused this one to do  what he wanted, with no one holding him back.
Now, the intention of this Word was good, because he rushed forward <to>
give glory to the Father, even though <he> undertook a task beyond his power,
having desired to produce something perfect from a union in which he did not
share and without having received orders. This aeon was the last to <have been>
brought forth through mutual assistance, and he was the youngest in age. And
before he had yet produced anything to the glory of the Will and in the union of
the members of the All, he acted presumptuously, out of an overflowing love,
and rushed forward toward that which surrounds the realm of perfect glory.

[문단 20] This Happened in Accordance with the Father’s Will (76, 23–77, 11)
It was not without the Will of the Father that this Word had been brought forth,

nor that he should rush forward; rather, the Father had brought him forth for the
things that he knew must take place. For the Father and the realm of the All now
withdrew from him in order that the Boundary should be firm that the Father had
fixed—for it does not exist to prevent the unreachable from being reached, but
because of the Will  of the Father—and also in order that the things that
happened should be for the sake of an economy that was to come about—and it
was <not> possible that it should not come to pass—for the revelation of the
Fullness.
For this reason, then, it is wrong to condemn the movement that is the Word.
Rather, we should speak about the movement of the Word as the cause that made
an ordained economy come to pass.

[문단 21] The Word Is Divided (77, 11–36)
Now, on the one hand, the Word gave birth to himself as a perfect single one, to
the glory of the Father who had desired him and was pleased with him. The
things he had wished to grasp and reach, however, he produced as shadows,
phantoms, and imitations, for he could not bear to look at the light but looked at
the depths, and he faltered. Because of this, he suffered a division and a turning
away. From the faltering and the division came oblivion and ignorance of oneself
and <of that> which is.
His movement upward and his design to reach the unreachable hardened for
him and remained in him. The sicknesses, however, which ensued when he was
beside himself, arose from his faltering—that is, <his failure to approach> the
glories of the Father, whose exaltedness is without end. That he did not reach,
because he could not grasp it.

[문단 22] The Perfect Part of the Logos Reenters the Fullness (77, 37–78, 28)
That which he had brought forth from himself  as a unitary aeon hastened
upward to that which was his, and to his kin in the Fullness. He abandoned that
which had come into being from deficiency and what had issued from him in an
illusion, since they did not belong to him. However, the one who had brought
him forth, with superior perfection, from himself, became weak after bringing
him forth, like a female nature deprived of masculinity. For what issued from his
presumptuous thought and his arrogance had existence from something that itself
was deficient; because of that, what was perfect in him left him and [went]
upward to his own. He remained in the Fullness, and the fact that [he had been]

saved from the…served for him as a reminder.
The one who hastened on high and the one who drew him to himself did not
remain idle, but they brought forth a fruit in the Fullness with a view to
overthrowing what had come into being because of the deficiency.
The Offspring of the Presumptuous Thought

[문단 23] (78, 28–80, 11)
Those who came into being from the presumptuous thought resemble in fact the
Fullnesses of whom they are imitations, though they are phantoms, shadows, and
illusions, deprived of reason and light, belonging to this empty thought, being
nobody’s offspring. For this reason also  their end will be like their
beginning: coming from that which was not, they will return to that which will
not be. In their own eyes, however, they are great and powerful beings, more
[beautiful] than the names [that adorn] them, though they are only [their]
shadows, made beautiful by way of imitation. For the beauty [one sees] in an
image derives from what the image represents.
They thought of themselves that only they existed and that they had no
beginning, since they saw no one existing before them. For this reason they
exhibited disobedience and rebellion, being unwilling to submit to the one who
had brought them into existence. For they desired to command one another and
to lord it over them [in] their vain love of glory, and the glory that they acquired
became the cause [of] the structure that was to be. [Being] imitations, then, of
those above, <they> exalted themselves in lust for dominion, each one of them
according to the magnitude of the name of which he was a shadow, fantasizing
that he would become greater than his fellows.
Thus, the thought of these others was not idle, but in accordance with the
model <of those> whose shadows they are, where every thought becomes a son,
 so do the things they think about also become their offspring. Because of
this, it came to pass that many issued from them as offspring: fighters, warriors,
troublemakers, [rebels], disobedient folks who love to dominate, and all the
others of that sort who derive from these.

[문단 24] The Conversion (80, 11–81, 26)
The Word, then, was the cause of these things coming into being, and he became
increasingly desperate. He was dumbfounded. Instead of perfection he saw
deficiency; instead of unity he saw division; instead of stability [he saw]
disturbance; instead of [rest], upheaval. He was [unable] to bring their [love] of

disturbance to an end, nor could [he] destroy it; he had become [utterly]
powerless when his wholeness and his [perfection] had abandoned him.
Those who had come into being did not know themselves, nor did they know
the Fullness from which they had originated, nor did they know him who had
become the cause of their existence. For since the Word was in such an unstable
condition, he no longer attempted to bring forth offspring in the form of
emissions, which are Fullnesses of glory originated for the glory of the Father.
Instead, what he brought  forth were feeble and small creatures, infected
with the same sicknesses with [which] he himself had been infected.
The imitation that had taken place solitarily in this state was what had been
the cause of the things that do not exist on their own account from the beginning.
In this defective state he continued to produce such deficient beings, until he
began to condemn the irrational things he had produced. This condemnation
became a judgment directed against them—that is, those opposing the judgment
—aiming at their destruction, [while] wrath pursues them. It is, however, a
<helper> and a savior from their disposition and their rebelliousness, for from it
[comes] the conversion that is also called repentance and that takes place [when]
the Word takes on [a different] disposition and a different mind, having turned
away from evil and having turned toward the good.

[문단 25] Remembrance and Prayer (81, 26–82, 9)
After conversion followed the remembrance of those who exist and the prayer on
behalf of the one who had returned to himself by means of what is good. First he
remembered the one who was in the Fullness and entreated him, then his
brothers one by one, though always together with their fellows, then all of them
together—but before all of these, the Father.
This prayer and supplication helped to make [him] turn <toward> himself
and toward the All, for their remembrance of him caused him to remember the
preexistent ones, and this is the remembrance that calls out from afar and brings
him back.

[문단 26] A New Order of Powers (82, 10–83, 33)
Now, all his prayer and remembrance were numerous powers, also produced in
accordance with the Boundary mentioned. For there was nothing idle in his
thought. These powers were much better and greater than those belonging to the
imitation. For the latter have the substance of [darkness], having come into being
from illusory imitation and a [vain] and presumptuous [thought]. These, on the

other hand, are from [a thought] that had known them in advance. Those, then,
are like <oblivion> and heavy sleep; they are like people who have troubled
dreams, in which <someone> pursues them and they are surrounded. These
others, however, are for him like beings of light who are waiting for the rising
sun, as when the dreamers have been able to see dreams in their sleep that are
truly sweet.
They  <…> the emissions of the remembrance. They did not have more
substance, nor did they have greater glory, [for] <they> are not equal to the
preexistent ones. If, on the other hand, they were superior [to] the imitations, the
only thing that made them elevated above them was that they were from a good
disposition—for they had not come out of the sickness that arose—which is the
good disposition of <him who> searched after the preexistent, having prayed and
brought himself to what is good. He sowed in them an inclination to seek and
pray to what is glorious and preexistent, and he also sowed in them an ability to
think about [it], and a power of reflection to make them realize that something
greater than themselves existed before them, but they had not understood what it
was. Bringing forth harmony and mutual love by means of that thought, they
acted in unity and unanimity, since to unity and unanimity they owed their
existence.

[문단 27] War Between the Two Orders (83, 34–85, 15)
The others, moreover, they now attempted to overpower in a lust for domination,
because they were nobler  than those previous ones, and they had risen up
against them. They had not surrendered. They thought they were self-engendered
and without beginning and, with their manner of giving birth, the first to bring
forth others. The two orders fought against each other, struggling for command
with such a result that that they were engulfed by forces and material substances
in accordance with the law of mutual combat, and they too acquired lust for
domination and all the other passions of this sort; and consequently, empty
vainglory pulls them all toward the desire of lust for domination, and not one of
them remembers [what is superior] or confesses it.
The powers of remembrance were adorned with the <names> of the
preexistent, whose likenesses they were; the order of those of this kind was in
harmony with itself and with each other. It fought, however, the order of those of
the imitation, because that order waged war against the likenesses, and so it
acted against itself on account of its rage.  Because of this, it [happened…
their] own…[against] one another, many…necessity placed them…as well, that
they might prevail…he did not desist…their envy, [their] malice, rage, violence,

lust, and ignorance ruled, as they were producing various kinds of matter and all
sorts of powers, mixed with one another and in great number, while the Word
who had been the cause of their production waited in his mind for the revelation
of the [hope] that would come to him from above.

[문단 28] The Word’s Hope (85, 15–32)
For the Word that had moved possessed hope and expectation about what is
superior. He turned away from those who belonged to the shadow, in every way,
since they opposed him and were very rebellious, but in those who belonged to
the remembrance he found rest. In those who had come into being by way of
remembrance the Word invisibly gave birth, in accordance with what existed in
them, to the one who had hastened upward, and who was in the superior state,
remembering the one who had become deficient. The Word did this until there
would shine forth on him from above the life-giving light born from the thought
of brotherly love of the preexistent Fullnesses.

[문단 29] Intercession in the Fullness (85, 33–86, 23)
For the Father’s aeons, who had not suffered, took upon themselves the fall that
had happened as if it were their own, with concern, goodness, and great
kindness. …the All, that they should be instructed about…by the one…all
be confirmed through the…to end the deficiencies.
The [order that now came] into being for him originated from <the one> who
had hastened upward, and from that which he brought forth for him from himself
and from the Fullness as a whole. He who had hastened upward became, on
behalf of him who had become deficient, an intercessor with the emitted aeons
who had come into being in accordance with what really exists. And after he had
entreated them, they, on their part, consented with joy, benevolence, and
harmonious agreement to help the one who had become deficient. They united
and prayed to the Father with a salutary mind that help might come from above,
from the hand of the Father, for his glory. For the one who had become deficient
could be made perfect in no other way except by the Fullness of the Father
consenting, pulling him toward itself, revealing him, and giving <what> he
lacked.

[문단 30] The Fullness Produces the Son (86, 23–88, 8)
Through this joyously willed agreement that arose, they brought forth the Fruit

as an offspring of their concord. It was a single one, since it came from the
members of the All and manifested the countenance of the Father, of whom the
aeons had been thinking when they gave glory and prayed for help for their
brother, and the Father had shared their sentiment, so that they produced this
Fruit willingly and with joy. The manifestation of the consent in which he had
united with them, which is the Son of his Will, revealed itself.  The Son of
the good pleasure of the All placed himself on them as a garment, by means of
which he could give perfection to the one who had become deficient, and
confirmation to the perfect. He is the one who is rightfully called Savior and
Redeemer, the Well-Pleasing and the Beloved, the Advocate, Christ, and the
Light of those who are appointed, in accordance with the ones from whom he
had been brought forth, for he had come into being clothed in the names of those
who are established. Or what other name is there to call him except “Son,”
which we have already used? For he is the knowledge of the Father, who wished
to become known.
The aeons not only produced the countenance of the Father whom they had
been glorifying, as has been written above, but they produced their own as well.
For in giving glory, the aeons produced their own countenance and aspect. They
were produced as an army for him, as for a king, in which those who belong to
this thought share the command and are united in agreement. They went forth
in a form that consisted of many forms, so that the one whom they were going to
help should see those to whom he had prayed for help as well as the one who
brought it to him. For the Fruit we have spoken about, of their concord with him,
is vested with the power of the All. In him the Father placed all things, what was
before, what is, and what will be.  He was well equipped. He revealed the
things Father had placed in him. He had not given but had entrusted them to him.
He took charge of the economy of the All, by means of the authority vested in
him from the beginning and the power needed to execute it. In this way he
proceeded to carry out his revelation.

[문단 31] The Son Reveals Himself (88, 8–89, 4)
He in whom the Father dwells, and in whom dwell the members of the All,
revealed himself first to the one who had lost his faculty to see and showed
himself to those who wanted to gain vision, by shining forth with that perfect
light. He first filled him with inexpressible joy, made him whole and complete,
and also gave him that which came from each of the aeons. For this is the nature
of the first joy. <He> also sowed in him, invisibly, a word designed for
understanding and gave him the power to detach and dispel from himself those

who were disobedient to him.
This is how he showed himself to him. To the ones who had come into being
because of him, however, he revealed himself in a form beyond their
comprehension. <He> came to them as a flash, revealing himself suddenly and
then withdrawing, like a flash of lightning. He put an end to their mutual
entanglement  through this sudden revelation, for which they were
unprepared and which they did not expect, since they had no knowledge of it.

[문단 32] The Reactions of the Powers (89, 4–90, 13)
Because of this, they became afraid and collapsed, for they could not bear the
shock of the light that came upon them. The revelation was a blow to both of the
two orders. Those who belonged to the remembrance, however, who <have
been> named “small” since they have a small idea that something higher existed
before them, had sown in them an anticipation that what was higher would
reveal itself. For that reason they greeted his revelation and bowed down before
him. They became convinced witnesses for <him> and acknowledged that the
light that had appeared was stronger than their opponents.
Those who belonged to the imitation, however, were exceedingly frightened,
for they had never before heard talk that such a sight could exist. Therefore they
fell down into that pit of ignorance called “the outer darkness,”34 chaos, Hades,
and the abyss. He placed them below the order of those who belong to the
remembrance, since it had been shown to be stronger than they. So those were
found worthy of becoming rulers over the unspeakable darkness as their own
property and the lot that fell to them. This is what he granted them, so that they
too might become useful for the economy that was to be,  and of which
<they> were oblivious.
Thus, there is a [great] difference between the revelation to the one who had
come into existence and then had become deficient, and the revelation to those
who came into being because of him. For to him he revealed himself inside him,
being together with him, sharing his suffering, relieving him little by little,
making him grow, raising him up, and finally giving himself to him to be
enjoyed in a vision. To those who were on the outside, however, he revealed
himself in a leap and a blow, and then withdrew immediately without letting
them see him.

[문단 33] The Word Gives Thanks and Brings Forth a Third Order of Powers (90, 14–92, 22)
After the Word who had become deficient was illuminated, his fullness came to
be. He freed himself from those who previously had been revolting against him,
became disentangled from them, and stripped himself of his former
presumptuous thought. He acquired the unification of rest, as those who had
been disobedient to him once before bowed down and succumbed to him.
Moreover, <he> rejoiced in the visitation of his brothers who had come to
visit him. He gave glory and praise to those who had revealed themselves to him
to give help, giving thanks that he had become free from those who had rebelled
against him, and admiring and praising the Greatness and those who had
resolved to reveal themselves to him. He brought forth living images of the
living figures. Being handsome and good, since they derived from those who
exist, they resemble these in beauty, though they are not truly equal with them
since they had not issued from a union between him who had brought them
forth and the one who had revealed himself to him. Nevertheless, he worked
with wisdom and understanding, uniting himself completely with the word given
to him. Therefore, what issued from him was great, just as that which exists is
truly great.
Having admired the beauty of those <who> had revealed themselves to him,
he acknowledged, then, his thanks for their visitation. The Word effected this
work by means of the ones from whom he had obtained help, in order that those
who had come into being from him should be set aright and might receive
something good, as he decided to pray that the fixed economy might attain all
those who had gone forth from him.
As a result, those whom he brought forth in accordance with this intention
occupy chariots, in the same way as the existing ones who had revealed
themselves, so that they may traverse all regions of activities lying below, and
each one may obtain his fixed place in accordance with what he is.
This was a defeat for those who belong to the imitation, but for those who
belong to the remembrance it was an act of beneficence, and it was a revelation
of the things that arose from the unitary and compassionate decision of the
aeons, even if they are only seeds that have not yet come into being for
themselves.
For that which was manifested was a countenance of the Father and of the
concord. It was a garment composed of every grace, and food, consisting of the
things the Word had brought forth when he prayed, and it received the glory and
the praise  he had performed with his eyes fixed on the ones to whom he
prayed so as to make perfect by means of them the images he brought forth.
For the Word greatly increased mutual cooperation and expectant hope, and
they experienced happiness, deep rest, and undefiled pleasures. The things that

he at first had only remembered, when they were not before him in their
perfection, he now brought forth with an object of vision before him. It is
revealed to him, but remaining in the hope and the faith of the Father, the
completely perfect one, he has not yet been united with it, for fear that the ones
who have come into being might perish from looking at the light, since they
cannot sustain a greatness of such supreme magnitude.

[문단 34] The Aeon of the Images (92, 22–94, 10)
Now, this thought of the Word, when he turned toward his consolidation and
became master over those who had come into being because of him, was called
“aeon” and “place” for all those he brought into being in accordance with the
decision of the aeons. Further, it is called “assembly of salvation,” for it healed
him from the dispersion, which is the multiform thought, and turned him toward
the single thought. Similarly, it is called “storehouse,” because of the rest he
attained and gave himself.  Moreover, it is called “bride,” because of his joy
over what was given to him, in the hope of the fruit that would issue from the
union revealed to him. It is also called “kingdom,” because of the consolidation
he obtained when he rejoiced in his power over those who opposed him. And it
is called “the joy of the Lord,” because of the delight with [which he] clothed
himself when the light was before him, giving him recompense for the good that
was in him and the thought of freedom.
This aeon we here have been talking about is above the two orders of those
who were fighting against one another. It shares nothing with those who hold
dominion, nor is it implicated in the sicknesses and the weaknesses belonging to
the remembrance or to the imitation. For that in which the Word established
himself, filled with joy, was an aeon: it had the form of one, but it also had the
constitution of its cause, which is what had been revealed, since it was an image
of those who exist in the Fullness and who had come into being out of the
abundant delight of the One Who Is.
In his joy, however, at the countenance of the one who had revealed himself,
in his <pleasure>, his expectation, and the promise he had received of the things
he had begged for, he possessed the word of the Son, together with his essence,
his power, and his form. He was the one he desired and delighted in,  he was
the one who had been prayed for in love. This aeon was light and a desire to be
set aright, an openness for instruction and an eye designed for vision—qualities
that it had from those above. Moreover, it was wisdom for his thought against
the ones who were placed lower in the economy, a word for speech, and other
perfect things of this kind.

[문단 35] The Individual Members of This Aeon (94, 10–95, 16)
Those, moreover, who had been formed together with him after the image of the
Fullness have as their parents the ones who had revealed themselves, each one of
them being a small impress of one of the figures. Being male forms, since they
have not originated from the sickness, which is femaleness, but from one who
has already left the sickness behind, <they> possess the name “church.” For
harmoniously they resemble the harmony that reigns in the assembly of those
who manifested themselves. That, in fact, which came into being after the image
of the light is perfect itself, since it is an image of the single light that is, and that
is the members of the All. Even if it was smaller than that of which it was an
image, it nevertheless possesses its indivisibility because it is a countenance of
the indivisible light.
Those, however, who had come into being after the image of each one of the
aeons are in essence that which we have said, but in their operation they are not
equal to the aeons because it occurs in each of them separately. When they are
united with one another, they have equality,  but as individuals they have not
discarded what is proper to each. For that reason they are passions, and passion
is a form of sickness; for they are not offspring from the unity of the Fullness,
but from one who has not yet attained the Father, or the unity with the members
of the All and his Will.
Nevertheless, it was a good thing for the economy that was to be, because it
had been decided concerning them that they should pass through the lower
stations, and the stations would not be able to accept them coming quickly
through them unless they came one by one. And their coming was necessary
because everything was to be fulfilled through them.

[문단 36] The Mandate of the Word in the Economy (95, 17–96, 16)
In short, then, at once the Word received all things, preexistent, present, and
future, having been entrusted with the economy of all that exists. Some were
already realities, since their coming into being had been useful; seeds that would
come into being in the future, however, he kept within himself—seeds deriving
from the promise, by which he had conceived, because it was a promise
consisting of seeds of the future. And he gave birth to his offspring, which was
the manifestation of that which he conceived. The seeds of the promise,
however, were withheld for some time from coming into being, because they
were such as had been appointed to be sent out at the advent of the Savior and
his companions—it is they who are “the first”—for the knowledge and the glory

of the Father.
It is necessary,  because of the prayer he made and the conversion that
took place as a result, that some shall perish, others benefit, and others still be set
apart. He prepared the punishment for those who had been disobedient, making
use of the power of the one who was revealed and from whom he had received
the authority over all things. In this way he set himself apart from the things
below, and also situated himself at a distance from what is superior, and so <he>
prepared the economy of everything that is on the outside and accorded to each
his appropriate region.

[문단 37] The Spiritual Level (96, 17–97, 27)
Arranging all things, the Word first set himself up as origin, cause, and ruler of
the things that had come into being, after the model of the Father, who was the
cause of the preexistent establishment.
Thereafter he established the images that already existed and that he had
brought forth in thanksgiving and glorification. Then he arranged the abode of
those he had brought forth by way of glorification, which is called “paradise,”
“enjoyment,” “delight full of nourishment,” and “delight <of> the preexistent
ones,” reproducing the image of all the good things that exist in the Fullness.
Then he arranged the kingdom, which is like a city filled with everything that
is agreeable—brotherly love and great generosity—and which was filled
with the holy spirits and the strong powers that govern those the Word had
brought forth, and thereby was established with strength.
Then he arranged the station of the Church that is assembled in this place and
possessed the form of the Church that exists among the aeons that give glory to
the Father.
After that he arranged the station of the faith and the obedience that arise
[from] hope, the very things [the Word] had received when the light was
revealed; and then the disposition of prayer and supplication leading to
forgiveness, and the word about him who will be revealed.
All these spiritual stations are set apart by a spiritual power from those who
belong to the remembrance, a power that consists of an image of what separates
the Word from the Fullness. The power is active in making them prophesy
about the things to come, and it lets those who have come into being belonging
to the remembrance <…> the preexistent ones, without allowing them to
mingle with those who had come into being through a vision of the figures
before him.

[문단 38] The Two Lower Orders (97, 27–99, 19)
Now, although those who belong to the remembrance, which is excluded from
this, are subordinate, they still reproduce the likeness of what belongs to the
Fullness, and in particular because of their sharing in the names with which they
are adorned. Subordinate to those who belong to the remembrance is conversion,
and also the law of judgment, which is condemnation and rage, is subordinate to
them.
Subordinate to these again is the power separating those who are below
them, which throws them far off and does not allow them  [to] spread
upward to those who belong to the remembrance and conversion. This power is
fear and despair, oblivion, confusion, and ignorance. Even these inferior ones,
who have come into being as an imitation from an illusion, are called by the
higher names, <although they have no> knowledge about the ones from whom
they have issued through a presumptuous thought, lust for dominion,
disobedience, and falsehood.
To each <of> the two orders, moreover, he gave a name. Those who belong
to the remembrance and the likeness are called “those on the right,” “psychical,”
“fires,” and “the middle ones,” while those who belong to the presumptuous
thought and the imitation are called “those on the left,” “material,” “darknesses,”
and “the last ones.”
After having established each one in his rank—the images, the likenesses,
and the imitations—the Word kept the aeon of the images pure from all its
adversaries as a place of joy. To those who belong to the remembrance, however,
he revealed the thought of which he had stripped himself, with the intention that
it should draw them into a communion with the material. This was in order to
provide them with a structure and a dwelling place, but also in order that by
being drawn toward evil they should acquire a weak basis for their existence, so
that, instead of rejoicing unduly in the glory of their own environment and
thereby remaining exiled, they might rather perceive the sickness they were
suffering from,  and so acquire a consistent longing and seeking after the one
who is able to heal them from this weakness.
Over those who belong to the imitation, on the other hand, he placed the
ordering word to provide them with form. He also placed over them the law of
judgment, and, further, he also placed over them the powers that had their roots
[in] the lust for dominion. He [placed] them to rule over them, so that the order
should be kept in check either by the firmness of the wise word, by the threat of
the [law], or by the power of the lust for dominion, all of which diminished that
order’s evilness, until the Word was content with them as useful for the

economy.

[문단 39] The Hierarchy of the Cosmic Powers (99, 19–100, 18)
The Word knows that the two orders share a common lust for dominion, and he
granted the desire of both these and all the others. To each he gave an
appropriate rank for the exercise of command, so that each would become the
ruler of one station and activity and renounce the place of whoever is superior to
himself in order to command by his activity the inferior stations, being in charge
of the activity that it befell him to control on account of his mode of being. Thus,
there came to be commanders and subordinates in positions of dominion and
servitude, angels  and archangels, with a variety of different kinds of
activities.
Each of the rulers, with the category and the grade that came to be his lot in
accordance with the way they had appeared, took his position, having been given
his charge in the economy. And so none of them is without a command, and
none is without a king above him, from the ends of the heavens to the ends of the
[earth], as far as to the inhabited regions of the [earth] and those who are below
the earth. There are kings and there are masters, as well as those whom they
command; some are there to punish, others to give judgment, some to give relief
and healing, others to instruct, and still others to keep watch.

[문단 40] The Ruler and Demiurge (100, 18–101, 5)
Over all these rulers he placed one ruler who is commanded by no one, since he
is the lord of them all. This is the representation that the Word brought forth
from his thought as a likeness of the Father of the All. Because of that he is
adorned with every <name>, being a likeness of him, possessing all the qualities
and all the glories. For he too is called “father,” “god,” “creator,” “king,”
“judge,” “place,” “dwelling,” and “law.” The Word made use of him like a hand
to order and work on the things below, and he used him like a mouth to say the
things that should be prophesied. When he saw that the things he said and
worked on were great, good, and marvelous, he rejoiced and was happy, as
 if he was the one who had spoken and had done these things by his own
thoughts; for he was ignorant that the movement within him came from the spirit
that moved him in a predetermined way toward what it wanted.

[문단 41] The Psychical Realm (101, 6–102, 26)
The things that came into being from him he spoke, and they came to be after the
likeness of the spiritual stations we have discussed earlier in the section about
the images. For he not only worked on but he himself also produced, in his
capacity of father, [his] own economy and seeds. This took place, however,
[through the] superior spirit that descended [through him] to the lower stations.
And [not] only did he speak spiritual words as if they were his own <…>
invisibly through the spirit that called out and produced things that were greater
than his own nature. For since he was by nature a god and a father—and all the
rest of such honorable titles—he thought that they were sprung from his own
nature.
He established rest for those who obeyed him, but the disobedient <he
sentenced> to punishments. With him is also a paradise and a kingdom and
everything else that exists in the aeon before him, although those things stand
above these imprints because of the thought with which the latter are joined and
which acts like  a shadow or a veil so that he does not see what the nature
of the existing things really is.
He set up for himself laborers and servants to assist him in the things he
would do or say. For in every place where he worked he left his handsome figure
by means of his name, while he worked and spoke the things he was thinking.
[He] set up in his stations images of the light that had been revealed, and of [the]
spiritual [places], images deriving from his own nature. As a result, the stations
were everywhere adorned by him, stamped with the figure of the one who had
put them in place. And so they were established: paradises, kingdoms, rests,
promises, and multitudes of servants to do his will. Though they are lords with
dominion, they are all placed under the one who is lord and has appointed them.

[문단 42] The Organization of the Material Realm (102, 26–104, 3)
After thus having listened to it well, he placed the lights that <constitute> the
starting point <of> the structure over the organization of the things below. The
invisible spirit moved him in such a way that he  too desired to administer
an economy by means of a servant of his own, one that he also could make use
of like a hand and a <mouth>, and as if he had a face. What he brought forth
<were> order, threats, and fear, so that those who had been acting without
instruction…should hold the position [they had been assigned to] keep, being
fettered to their places by [the chains of the] rulers who are over them.
The whole constitution of matter [is] divided into three parts. The [first]
powers, which the spiritual Word brought forth by illusion and presumption, he
placed in the first, spiritual rank. The ones that these brought forth, moreover,

through lust for dominion, he placed in the middle region, since they, [then],
<were> powers of lust for dominion, so that they might rule and command the
establishment under them with compulsion and violence. Those, finally, who had
come into being from envy and jealousy, and all the other progeny from this kind
of disposition, he placed as a servant order controlling the last things and
commanding all existing things and all procreation. From these derive the
diseases that instantly destroy, and they are also impatient to procreate, although
their existence is nothing in the place they have issued from and to which they
will once more return. Because of that, he placed over them commanding powers
that continuously work on matter to ensure that  the offspring that come
into being may also have durability. For this is their glory.

[문단 43] Humanity (104, 4–18)
What, then, is the form of fluid matter? A cause, which is the blindness that
derives from the powers…in it all of them…as they procreate together with
them, and [perish]. The thought placed between those on the [right and] those on
the left is a power of [simulation], <so that> all the things that the…desire to do,
with the result that they bring them forth in the same way that a shadow is
projected by a body it follows; these <are> the roots of the visible creations.

[문단 44] The Creation of the Human (104, 18–106, 25)
Now, the whole establishment and organization of the images, likenesses, and
imitations has come into being for the sake of those who need nourishment,
instruction, and form, so that their smallness may gradually grow, as through the
instruction provided by the image of a mirror. That, in fact, is why he created
the human last, after having prepared and provided for him the things that he
created for his sake.
The creation of the human happened in the same way as everything else. The
spiritual Word set it invisibly going, accomplishing it by means of the demiurge
 and his subservient angels, who were joined in their modeling by the
presumptuous thought and its rulers. Thus, the human became like an earthly
shadow, so that he would be of the same kind as [those who are] cut off from
the members of the All, and a creature made by them all, the ones on the right as
well as the ones on the left, each of the orders forming [the human just as] it
itself was. For the [form] that the Word brought forth [was] deficient in such a

way that he was [afflicted] by sickness. It did not resemble him, for he brought
him forth into [oblivion], ignorance,…, and all the other sicknesses, having
given him only the first form.
Now, the Word <gave him something> through the demiurge, without his
knowledge, to let him know that there exists something higher and realize that he
needed [it]. This is what the prophet called “the breath of life,”45 and…of the
superior aeon, and this is the living soul that gave life to the substance that was
dead at first. For that which is dead is ignorance.
We must, therefore, conclude that the soul of the first human derives from
the spiritual Word, even if the creator thought that it was his, because that which
was breathed went through him as through a mouth.
The creator himself also sent down souls out of his own substance, since [he]
too has the ability to procreate,  <being> derived from the likeness of the
Father. And those on the left as well produced a sort of human being of their
own, since they possess the imitation <…>.
The spiritual substance is one and a single image;…its sickness is the
condition…form. As for the substance of those who are psychical, its condition
is double, because it has an understanding of what is superior, and confesses it,
but it is <also> inclined toward evil on account of the inclination of the
presumptuous thought. And as far as the material substance is concerned, its
impulses are diverse and take many forms. It was a sickness that assumed many
kinds of inclinations.
The first human, then, is a mixed molding and a mixed creation, and a
depository of those on the left and those on the right, as well as of a spiritual
Word, and his sentiments are divided between each of the two substances to
which he owes his existence.

[문단 45] Paradise and the Transgression of the First Human (106, 25–108, 12)
Because of this, it is also said that a paradise was planted for him, that he might
eat from the fruit of three kinds of trees; it was a garden of the threefold order,
and one that provides pleasures. The noble and distinctive substance in him
was much superior to <the> creation, and <was> a blow to them. For that reason,
they issued a commandment, threatening him, and they brought over him great
danger:  death. Only the food of the bad trees did he allow him to eat and
enjoy, whereas from that tree which had the double character [he] was not
allowed to eat—and much less from that of life—in order that [he] might not
acquire an honor [equal to] themselves, and also so that [he] should not…them.
Through the evil power called “the serpent”—for he is more crafty than all

the other evil powers—the human <was> deceived, by a decision of those who
belong to the remembrance and the desires. It made him transgress the
commandment, so that he should die. And he was expelled from that place and
all its pleasures.
This is the expulsion they made him suffer, when he was expelled from the
pleasures of those who belong to the imitation and those who belong to the
likeness. It is, however, a work of providence, in order that it may be realized
that the enjoyment the human being may have for such pleasures is short
compared with the eternal existence of the place of rest. It was a work the Spirit
had ordained, because it had planned in advance that the human should
experience that great evil which is death—that is, the complete ignorance of all
things—and also experience all the evils that arise from that, so that he, after the
cravings and anxieties that result from these, might partake of the greatest
good, namely, eternal life, which is the complete knowledge of the All and the
partaking of all good things.
Because of the transgression of the first human, death reigned. It
accompanied all humans in order to kill them as long as its [rule] remained,
which it possessed and was given [for a] kingdom because of <the> economy of
the Father’s Will, of which we have spoken before.

[문단 46] Confusion in the World, Errors of Greeks and Barbarians (108, 13–110, 22)
Whenever the two orders, [those] on the right and those on the left, are brought
together by means of that thought which lies between them and gives them a
common economy, it comes to pass that both of them perform their works with
the same zeal, those on the right copying those on the left and those on the left
also copying those on the right. Sometimes the evil order begins, in a foolish
fashion, to work some evil, and the <wise> order emulates it in the shape of a
malefactor, it too doing evil as if it were a power of evil. At other times the wise
order sets out to do good, and the <foolish> order emulates it so as to do the
same.
    This is how it is with the things that are constituted in this way by such
deeds: they have come into being resembling things that are dissimilar, so that it
has become impossible for the uninstructed to understand the cause of the things
that exist. Because of that, they have put forward different explanations. Some
say that the existing things exist by providence; these are the ones who observe
the regularity of the movement of the creation and its reliability. Others say that
it is something alien; these are the ones who observe the <diversity> and the
lawlessness of the powers and its evil character. Others again say that the
existing things are what are destined to be; these are the ones who have occupied
themselves with this matter. Others yet again say that it is in accordance with
nature; and still others say that is accidental. The great majority, however, have
only reached as far as the visible elements and know of nothing more than these.
     Those who have become wise among the Greeks and the barbarians have
reached as far as the powers that came into being from illusion and a vain
thought, <as well as> those who issued from these in turn by way of strife and in
the manner of rebellion, and those powers have worked in them. Thus, when
they spoke about the things they held to be “wisdom,” it was imitation,
presumption, and illusory ideas, for the <imitation> had deceived them: they
thought that they had reached the truth,  though it was error they had
reached. This was not only because the names they were using were small, but
the powers themselves prevented them by giving the impression that they were
the All.
     From this it happened that this order was entangled in a struggle against
itself, because of the presumptuous quarrelsomeness of…of the ruler who is…
who is before him. For this reason, nobody agreed with anybody else about
anything, either in philosophy, medicine, rhetoric, music, or mechanics, but these
are all opinions and theories. Consequently, <verbosity> ruled, and <they> were
confused, since they were at a loss to explain <those> who ruled and gave them
their ideas.

[문단 47] The Insights of the Hebrews (110, 22–113, 1)
With regard to the things that have arisen from the <people> of the Hebrews, the
scriptures <…> from the material powers <whose> model the Greeks
<reproduce>, everything they thought so as to speak it, the powers on the right
<…>, who moved them all to think <by means of> words and a likeness of
themselves. So they set out to reach the truth, and used the mixed powers that
were working in them.
    After that, they reached the order of the unmixed powers, <before> they
reached the single one who is set up after the likeness of the Father—he is not
invisible  in his nature, but is veiled in wisdom so as to reproduce the type
of the truly invisible one. Because of that, many angels have not attained a vision
of him, nor have the humans of the Hebrew people, of whom we have spoken—
that is, the righteous and the prophets. They thought nothing and said nothing
that came from illusion or imitation or from an obscure thought, but from the
power that was working in him, and being attentive to what he saw and heard,
each one of them spoke faithfully, with mutual harmony and concord after the
manner of the ones who were working in them, because they preserved their
<unity> and mutual harmony. This happened especially because they confessed
that which was superior to themselves, and that something greater than
themselves existed and had been established because they needed it. The
spiritual Word had produced this with them as something that was in need of that
which is superior, as a hope and anticipation deriving from remembrance. This is
the seed of salvation, and an illuminating word, which is the remembrance, and
its offspring and its emissions are the righteous and the prophets we have been
speaking about. They preserve the confession and the testimony of their fathers
concerning that which is great—those who came into being  with an
anticipation of hope, and with attentiveness, and in whom was sown <the> seed
of prayer and seeking, which is sown in many who have sought after
confirmation. It manifests itself, and leads them to love that which is higher, so
as to proclaim these things as being about the one and the same.
    A single influence was working in them when they spoke; what they saw and
spoke varied, however, because there were many who gave them their visions
and their speech. Therefore, those who have listened to what has been said do
not discard any of it, but have received the scriptures differently in their
interpretations. They have set up many sects that remain even until now among
the Jews. Some say that the god who made a proclamation in the ancient
scriptures is one; others say that they are many. Some say that God is simple and
that he was of a single mind as to his nature; others say that his actions embrace
the principles of both good and evil. Some again say that he is the maker of the
things that have come into being, whereas others say that  he made them
through [his] angels.

[문단 48] The Prophecies Concerning the Savior (113, 1–114, 30)
Now, as to the many speculations of this kind, it is the great variety and the
multiple forms of the scriptures that have given them <…> teacher<s> of the
law. The prophets, however, spoke nothing from themselves, but each of them
from what he saw and heard of the proclamation about the Savior. That which he
proclaimed, and which was the main point of their proclamation, was what he
spoke about the coming of the Savior, namely, the fact of his coming.
Sometimes, however, the prophets speak about him as if he is to come into
being, while at other times as if the Savior is speaking through their mouths,
saying that the Savior will come and show grace toward those who have not
known him. Thus, by no means did they all agree with one another in their
testimony; rather, each one of them thought, by virtue of the activity by which he
was empowered to speak about him and the station that he had happened to see,
that over there was the place where the Savior would be born, and that he would
come from that place. Consequently, none of them understood where he would
come from or by whom he would be born. Instead, they were granted to say only
this: he would be born and would suffer. As for his preexistent being, however,
and that which he is, eternally, as unborn and impassible <…> not of the Word
that came to be in the flesh —that did not enter their thoughts.
    And this is the word they were empowered to speak concerning his flesh that
would appear. They say that it is something born from all of them, but above all
that it derives from the spiritual Word, which is the cause of the things that came
into being. He, from whom the Savior received his flesh, had indeed conceived
him, in a seminal form, at the revelation of the light, as a word giving promise of
his revelation; it <is>, in fact, <a> seed of those who are, though it was produced
last. The one, however, whom the Father appointed so as to reveal the salvation
through him, and who is the fulfillment of the promise, having been, when
descending into life, provided with all the instruments needed for his descent—
his father is one, and this is his only true father, who is invisible, unknowable,
and unattainable in his nature, and who is also the god who, by his will alone,
and his grace, let himself be seen, known, and attained.

[문단 49] The Incarnation (114, 30–115, 23)
What our Savior became, out of willing compassion, is the same as that which
the ones for whose sake he appeared had become because of an involuntary
passion: they had become flesh and soul, and this holds them perpetually in its
grip, and they perish and die. Those, however, who had [come into being
as] an invisible human being, and invisibly, them he instructed about himself in
an equally invisible manner. For not only did he assume their death for the ones
he had in mind to save, but in addition he also assumed their smallness, to which
they had descended when they were <born> with body and soul; for he let
himself be conceived and he let himself be born as a child with body and soul.
All the other conditions as well that they, even if they possessed the light, shared
with the ones who had fallen, he entered into, though he was exalted above
them because he let himself be conceived without sin, pollution, or defilement.
He was born into life, and he was in life, because it had been ordained that the
former no less than the latter should become body and soul as a consequence of
the passion and the aberrant sentiment of the Word that had moved.

[문단 50] The Incarnation of the Spiritual Seed Together with the Savior (115, 23–117, 8)
He, however, assumed, for the sake of the economy, that which resulted from the
events we told about earlier—that which came into being from the radiant vision
and the stable thought of the Word after he had turned himself around, after his
movement. In this way those who came with him received body and soul
together with stability, firmness, and discernment. It had been planned that they
too should come when the coming of the Savior was planned; they came,
however, only after he had decided it. So they came, they too being far superior
in their carnal emission compared to the ones who had been brought forth from
deficiency.  For in [this] way they too were emitted bodily together with the
Savior by being manifested in union with him.
    These are such as belong to the single substance, and that is the spiritual one.
The economy, however, is variable, this being one thing, that another. Some
have issued from passion and division; they need healing. Others derive from a
prayer that the sick be healed; they have been appointed to care for those who
have fallen. These are the apostles and the bringers of good tidings. They are, in
fact, the disciples of the Savior: they are teachers for those who need instruction.
    Why, then, did they too partake of those sufferings that those who had been
brought forth from passion shared in, if, in accordance with the economy, they
were brought forth in one body together with <the> Savior, who did not partake
of these sufferings? Now, the Savior in fact was a bodily image of something
unitary, namely the All. Therefore he preserved the model of indivisibility, from
which is derived impassibility. They, however, are images of each of those who
were revealed; for that reason they receive the division from their model, having
been given form for that planting which exists down below, and which also
partakes of the evil that exists in the regions to which they have arrived. For the
Will kept the All under sin, in order that by Will he might show mercy on the All
and they might be saved, because a single one has been appointed to give life,
whereas all the rest need salvation.

[문단 51] The Proclamation of Salvation (117, 8–118, 14)
Because of this, he was the first one among them to whom it was granted to
distribute those gifts that were then proclaimed by the ones he found worthy of
making a proclamation to the others. Because <the> seed of the promise about
Jesus Christ had been deposited, whose revelation and unification we have
ministered to, this promise now enabled instruction and a return to that which
they had been from the beginning—that of which they possessed a drop inciting
them to return to it—which is what is called redemption.
    And that means to be released from captivity and to obtain freedom. The
captivity is of those who were slaves of ignorance, which reigned in its own
territories. Freedom, however, is the knowledge of the truth, which existed
before ignorance came into being and which reigns eternally without beginning
and without end; it is goodness, the healing of all things, the release from the
slave nature in which those suffered who had been brought forth in a lowly and
vain thought, the nature that inclines toward evil  owing to that thought,
which drags them down into the lust for power. They acquired that treasure
which is freedom, from the abundant grace that looks to the children but
overthrows passion and brings to naught the things that had been caused by the
Word. He had already rejected them at the moment when he separated them from
himself, but he had postponed their destruction until <the> end of the economy,
allowing them to exist because they too were useful for the things that had been
ordained.

[문단 52] The Three Kinds of Human Beings (118, 14–119, 27)
Now, humanity came to exist as three kinds with regard to essence—spiritual,
psychical, and material—reproducing the pattern of the three kinds of
disposition of the Word, from which sprung material, psychical, and spiritual
beings. The essences of the three kinds can each be known from its fruit. They
were nevertheless not known at first, but only when the Savior came to them,
shedding light upon the saints and revealing what each one was.
     The spiritual kind is like light from light and like spirit from spirit. When its
head appeared, it immediately rushed to it. At once it became a body for its head.
It received knowledge straightaway from the revelation.
     The psychical kind, however, being light from fire, tarried before
recognizing  the one who had appeared to it, and still more before rushing
to him in faith. Though it was instructed, moreover, only by means of voice,
<it> was content that in this way it was not far from the hope given by the
promise, having received, in the form, as it were, of a pledge, the assurance of
things to come.
     The material kind, however, is alien in every respect: it is like darkness that
avoids the shining light because it is dissolved by its manifestation. For it did not
accept his <coming>, and is even <…> and filled with hatred against the Lord
because he revealed himself.
    Now, the spiritual kind will receive complete salvation in every respect. The
material kind will perish in every respect, as happens to an enemy. The psychical
kind, however, since it is in the middle by virtue of the way it was brought forth
as well as by virtue of its constitution, is double, being disposed to good as well
as to evil, and the issue that is reserved for it is uncertain <…> and to proceed
wholly into the things that are good.

[문단 53] The Various Fates of Psychical People (119, 28–122, 12)
On the one hand, those that the Word brought forth in his mind after the model
of what was preexistent, when he remembered that which is superior and prayed
for salvation, have salvation without any uncertainty. They will be completely
saved, [because] of this saving thought, in accordance with what was produced
from it. This is also the case [with the ones] that these in turn brought forth,
 whether they be angels or humans: because they acknowledge that there is
something higher than themselves, and they pray and search for it, they will
obtain the same salvation as the ones who brought them forth. For they are of a
disposition that is good. They were assigned to the service of the proclamation of
the coming of the Savior before it happened as well as of his revelation after he
had come. Whether angel or human, these have, by the fact of being nominated
for this service, acquired the essence of their being.
    On the other hand, those that issued from the thought of lust for domination,
who originated from the assault of the ones who opposed him, are the products
of that thought. Being, for that reason, mixed, the end they will get is uncertain.
Those who rid themselves of the lust for domination that was given them
temporarily and for short periods, who give glory to the Lord of glory and who
abandon their rage, will be recompensed for their humility by being allowed to
endure indefinitely.
    Those, however, who arrogantly pride themselves in their vainglorious lust,
who love temporary glory, who are oblivious to the fact that the power they have
has been entrusted to them only for a limited time and period, and for that reason
have not acknowledged that the Son of God  is the Lord of the All and the
Savior, and who have failed to rid themselves either of their fury or their way of
imitating those who are evil—they will receive judgment for their ignorance and
their senselessness, namely, suffering.
    This applies to those who have gone astray, all those among them who turned
away or, even worse, who persisted in such a way that they too committed such
indignities against the Lord as the powers on the left committed against him,
even to the extent of causing his death, thinking, “We shall become the rulers of
the All if he who has been proclaimed king of the All is killed.” And those
humans and angels who do not originate from the good disposition of the ones
on the right, but from the mixture, endeavored to do this. They have willingly
chosen for themselves transient honor and lust.
    For those on the right who will be saved, the road to eternal rest leads from
humility to salvation. After having confessed the Lord, having given thought to
what is good for the Church, and having sung together with it the hymn of the
humble, they will, for all the good they have been able to do for it, sharing its
afflictions and sufferings like people who have consideration for what is good
for the Church, partake of the fellowship in hope. This applies  to humans
as well as to angels.
    Similarly, the road for those who are of the order of those on the left leads to
perdition—not only because they denied the Lord and plotted evil against him,
but also because their hatred, envy, and jealousy are directed against the Church
as well. And this is the reason for the condemnation of those who were agitated
and rose up to cause <trials> for the Church.

[문단 54] The Election and the Calling (122, 12–32)
The Election is consubstantial with the Savior and of one body with him.
Because of its oneness and union with him, it is like a bridal chamber. For more
than anything else it was for its sake that the Savior came. The Calling, on the
other hand, occupies the place of those who rejoice at the bridal chamber, who
are glad and happy on account of the union of the bridegroom and the bride.
Thus, the station that the Calling will have is the aeon of the images in the place
where the Word has not yet been united with the Fullness. And for this the
human being of the Church is glad, rejoices in it, and hopes for it; it was
composed of spirit, soul, and body on account of the economy of the Planner.

[문단 55] The Salvation of the Savior and of His Limbs (122, 32–123, 22)
Now, the human inside him was a single one, for he was the All and he was all
of them, and he possessed what was flowing from the Father to the extent that
the various  stations were able to receive it. But he also possessed those
limbs that we have described above. Once the redemption had been proclaimed,
the perfect human immediately received knowledge so as to return swiftly to his
unity, to the place from which he came. Joyfully he returned back to the place
from which he had originated, the place from which he had flowed forth.
    His limbs, however, needed a school, such as exists in the regions that have
been so fashioned as to provide it with the likeness of the images and the
archetypes in the manner of a mirror, until all the limbs of the body of the
Church <would be united> in one place and would attain the restoration
together, by appearing as the sound body <…> the restoration to the Fullness.

[문단 56] The Final Restoration (123, 23–125, 24)
The Fullness possesses a first mutual concord and union, which is the concord
that exists for the glory of the Father, and through which the members of the All
acquire a representation of him. The final restoration, however, <will take place>
after the All is manifested in him who is the Son—the one who is the
redemption, who is the road toward the incomprehensible Father, who is the
return to the preexistent—and after the members of the All have been manifested
in him who is truly the inconceivable, ineffable,  invisible, and ungraspable
one, so that the All obtains its redemption.
     The redemption is not only a release from the domination <of> those on the
left, and not just an escape from the authority of the ones on the right, to each of
whom we thought we were slaves or children, and from whom nobody gets loose
without quickly becoming theirs once more. Rather, the redemption is also an
ascent and <…> those levels that exist in the Fullness and with all those who
have been given names and who comprehend them according to the capacity of
each individual aeon, and it is an entry into that which is silent, where there is no
need of voice, nor of understanding, comprehension, or illumination, but all
things are luminous and have no need of illumination.
     For not only earthly humans need the redemption, but the angels need the
redemption as well, and the image, and even the Fullnesses of the aeons and
those marvelous luminous powers needed it—so as to leave no doubt with regard
to anyone. And even the Son, who constitutes the type of the redemption of the
All, [needed] the redemption,  having become human and having submitted
himself to all that was needed by us, who are his Church in the flesh. After he,
then, had received the redemption first, by means of the word that came down
upon him, all the rest who had received him could then receive the redemption
through him. For those who have received the one who received have also
received that which is in him.
     For the redemption began [to be] given among the humans who were in the
flesh, with his firstborn and his love, the Son, coming in the flesh, and the
angels who were in heaven having been found worthy of forming a community,
a community in him upon the earth—for this reason it is called the Father’s
angelic redemption—and with him comforting those who had suffered on behalf
of the All for the sake of his knowledge, for he was given grace before anyone
else.

[문단 57] The Father’s Plan (125, 24–127, 25)
Now, the Father knew him in advance, since he existed in his deliberations
before anything had yet come into being, where he also had the ones for whom
he revealed him. He lay the deficiency upon that which lasts for limited periods
of time, for the glory of his Fullness. It is the fact that he was unknown that
made it possible for him to show his benevolence [by making himself known],
 and thus, receiving knowledge about him is a manifestation of his
generosity and the revelation of his abundant sweetness—which is the second
glory. Consequently, in this way he is, in fact, the cause of ignorance as well as
the originator of knowledge.
    In hidden and inscrutable wisdom he guarded the knowledge until the end,
until the members of the All would have labored in their search for God the
Father, whom no one has found by his own wisdom and power. And then he
grants them to attain knowledge of this great gift of his by means of that superior
thought and that method which he has given them and which consists in
ceaseless thanksgiving to him. Out of his immovable counsel, he then reveals
himself for eternity to the ones who have proved worthy of receiving, by his
will, the knowledge about the Father, who is unknowable in his nature.
    It was premeditated in the Father’s wisdom that the ones for whom he had
planned that they should attain knowledge, as well as all the good things that
come with it, should, in addition, also experience ignorance and its pains. Thus,
they would taste the things that are evil, and would be trained through them, as a
temporary…obtain the [enjoyment of the things that are good] for eternity.
The fact that they mark themselves out and are continually rejected and accused
by their adversaries is something they carry as an ornament and a marvelous sign
of the superior things. This was to make it evident that the ignorance of whoever
was ignorant of the Father was of his own making, whereas that which gave
them knowledge about him was a power from him enabling them to attain <it>.
    This knowledge is rightly described as “the knowledge of everything that can
be thought” and “a treasure.” And, to give more knowledge in addition to that, it
is also the revelation of the ones who were known in advance, and the road
toward the concord and the preexistent, which means that those acquire
greatness who have renounced the greatness that was theirs in the economy of
the Will, in order that the end may be just as the beginning was.

[문단 58] Baptism (127, 25–129, 34)
As for the true baptism, into which the members of the All descend and where
they come into being, there is no other baptism except the one—and that is the
redemption—which takes place in God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
after confession of faith has been made in those names—[which] are the single
name of the good tidings —and after one has believed that the things one
has been told are real.
    And on account of this, whoever believes in their reality will obtain
salvation, and that means to attain, in an invisible way, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, but only after one has borne witness to them in unfaltering faith
and if one grasps them in a firm hope. In this way, it may happen that the
fulfillment of what one has believed becomes a return to them, and that the
Father becomes one with him—the Father, God, whom he has confessed in faith,
and who has granted him to be united with himself in knowledge.
    The baptism we have spoken about is called “the garment” <that> is not
taken off by the ones who put it on and that is worn by the ones who have
received redemption. And it is called “the confirmation of truth,” which never
fails in its constancy and stability and holds fast those who have obtained
<restoration> while they hold on to it. It is called “silence” because of its
tranquility and unshakability. It is also called “the bridal chamber” because of
the concord and the inseparability of the ones [whom] <he has> known <and
who> have known him. It is also [called]  “the unsinking and fireless
light,” not because it sheds light, but rather because those who wear it, and who
are worn by it as well, are made into light. It is also called “the eternal life,”
which means immortality.
    Thus it is called after all the fair things it contains, including the names that
have been <left out>, in a manner that is simple, authentic, indivisible,
irreducible, complete, and unchangeable. For how else can it be named, except
by referring to it as the All? That is, even if it is called by innumerable names,
they are spoken only as a way of expressing it in certain ways, although it
transcends all words, transcends all voice, transcends all mind, transcends all
things, and transcends all silence. This is how it is <…> with the things that
belong to what it is. This is what it in fact is, with an ineffable and inconceivable
character in order to be in those who have knowledge by means of what they
have attained, which is that to which they have given glory.

[문단 59] The Salvation of Those Who Are Called (129, 34–136, 24)
Even if there are many more things that could be said on the subject of the
Election,  and which it would be fitting to mention, it is nevertheless
necessary that we <speak> once more about those who belong to the Calling—
for this is how those on the right are named—and it would not be profitable for
us to forget them. We have spoken about them as if the limited description above
was sufficient. How, then, is it that we have spoken only partially about them?
    Well, I said that all those who have gone forth from the Word, either from the
condemnation of the things that are evil, or from the rage that fought against
them, or the turning away from them, which is the conversion toward the
superior things, or the prayer and the remembrance of the preexistent things,
together with the hope and the faith that the salvation of that which is good
might be [obtained]—all these have become worthy, because they originate from
those good dispositions and they have as the cause of their birth a sentiment that
derives from that which is.
    Moreover, I said that before the Word himself had occupied himself with
them in an invisible manner, and willingly, that which was superior had also
supplied them with that thought which I mentioned above, because they had
been [obedient] to it,  and that thought was what became the cause of their
existence. And they did not exalt themselves because <they> were healed, as if
no one existed before them; rather, they acknowledge that they have an origin of
their existence, and they desire to know what that is that exists before them.
    In addition to that, I said that they greeted the light when it appeared in the
form of lightning, and they bore witness that it had appeared for their salvation.
    Now, not solely about those who came forth from the Word did we say that
they will attain that which is good, but the ones to whom these gave birth in turn
in accordance with those good dispositions will also partake of that repose, as a
consequence of the abundance of grace. And even those who were brought forth
from the desire of lust for domination, having inside them the seed that is lust for
domination, will receive the recompense of good things, if they have worked
together with those who are predisposed toward good things, and provided they
decide to do so deliberately, and are willing to abandon their vain love of
temporary glory so as to [do] the command of the Lord  of glory, and
instead of that small temporary honor they will inherit the eternal kingdom.
    It was necessary for us to return to what we had spoken about earlier; now,
however, we must join the premises thus laid down to the reasons and the
<evidence> as to whether all those on the right, whether unmixed or mixed, may
receive the grace of salvation and repose, so as to make a consistent argument.
This means that we shall establish, in a compelling discourse, a demonstration
from the form of their faith.
     If, in fact, we confess the kingdom in Christ, it is for the abolishment of all
diversity, inequality, and difference. For the end will regain the form of existence
of a single one, just as the beginning was a single one—the place where there is
no male and female, nor slave and free man, nor circumcised and uncircumcised,
nor angel and human, but all in all is Christ. How can one who did not exist at
first be found to come into being, unless <…> the nature of the one who is not a
slave, since he will take a place together with a  free man? For they will
even obtain direct vision, so that they will no longer have to believe on account
only of a small word produced by a voice that this is how things are.
     For the restoration back to that which was is a single one. Even if some are
exalted because of the economy, having been set up as causes for the things that
happened, unfolding numerous physical forces and taking pleasure in them,
[they]—angels [as well as] humans—will obtain the kingdom, the confirmation,
and the salvation.
     And here are the reasons. Those who had been revealed in the flesh believed
without hesitation that he was the son of the unknown God, the one that had not
been spoken about before and whom no one had been able to see. And they
abandoned the gods they had served before and the lords who are in heaven as
well as the ones on earth. Even before <he> had been taken up to heaven and
even when he was still a child, these bore witness that he had already begun to
preach. And when he lay in the tomb [as a] dead man, the angels thought that he
was alive, [and they received] life  at the hand of the one who had died.
     The many acts of worship and wonders they used to perform in the temples
these now gave over to another. The confession is what gave these the power to
do it, on account of their hastening toward him. That institution was something
they had gotten only so that they should renounce it for the sake of the one who
was not <shown honor> here below; but instead [they got] Christ, and they
understood that he came from the [superior] place, the place from [which] they
had come together with him, from a place divine and sovereign. The names that
the ones they had been worshiping, tending to, and serving had received on loan
they now gave over to the one who is truly called by them.
     Those, however, realized only after his assumption that he was their lord,
who has no lord over him. They then gave him their kingdoms, they rose [from
their] thrones, and they laid down their crowns. He, however, revealed himself to
them for the reasons we have mentioned before: that they might be healed and
[turn to] the good thought toward… friend and the angels…and the many
good things they have done for it. In this [way] they were entrusted with the
services that benefited the elect, as they brought the iniquity they suffered up to
heaven, to be eternally tried by the incontrovertible and infallible [judgment].
And they remain for their sake, until they have all entered into earthly life and
have passed out of it. As long as their bodies [remain] on the earth, they minister
to all their…, and make [themselves] partners in their afflictions, persecutions,
and tribulations, which have been brought upon the saints more than anyone
else.
     As for the servants of evil, however, since evil deserves destruction <…>
with firmness on account of that [communal life] which is above all the worlds,
and which is their good thought and friendship.
     And the Church will remember them as good friends and faithful servants
once it has been redeemed, and [it will give them] the reward consisting of the
joy that reigns in the bridal [chamber], and the…[which] is in its house…which
is in the thought…and that which it owes… Christ, who is with it [and the]
expectation of the Father [of] the All, and it will provide them with guiding and
serving angels.
     For the aeons will remember their benevolent thought with which they
served the Church, <and> will give them their reward [for] all their
consideration. This is an emission from them, in order that just as Christ…will,
which brought forth the great and exalted [things] for the Church and gave them
to it, <so> this emission too will become a thought for these and will provide
them with dwelling places where they will dwell eternally [after they have]
renounced the downward attraction of deficiency, and the power of the Fullness
has pulled them upward, on account of the great generosity and the sweetness of
the preexistent aeon.

[문단 60] The End of Time (136, 24–138, 27)
This is the nature of everything that was produced as a result of what [Christ]
had with him when he shone upon them [with] a [light] that revealed…as his…
which will be…just as his…the only difference [that] exists among those who
have been.......
    …those who are…by means of…value, in the way [I have] already
explained, while the material beings will be left behind until the end to perish,
for they will not give their…. If they have returned once more to that which…in
the way that they were…while they do not exist…, but they had been useful…
[for the] time that they were among them, even if they are not…at first, then…to
do something else by means of the power they had in the establishment [to]
oppose them.
    Even if I continue to make use [of] such words…his thoughts…
greatness.......
    …all…angel…words [through] the [sound of a] trumpet, which will
announce the great and complete reconciliation from the resplendent East, in the
bridal [chamber], which [is] the love of God, the…, in accordance with the
power that…of the greatness…the sweetness of his…, as he reveals himself to
the greatnesses…his goodness…the praise, the power, and the [glory], through
Jesus Christ, the Lord, the Savior, the Redeemer of all those who are embraced
by the mercy of love, and through [his] Holy Spirit, from now throughout all
generations forever and ever. Amen.
