The Act of Peter
Peter Heals His Paralyzed Daughter (128, 1–130, 18)
On the first day of the week, the Lord’s Day, a crowd gathered and brought
many sick people to Peter so that he might heal them. One person from the
crowd boldly said to Peter, “Look, Peter, before our eyes you have made many
of the blind to see and the deaf to hear and the lame to walk, and you have
helped the weak and strengthened them. But why haven’t you helped your virgin
daughter, who has grown up to be beautiful and has believed in the name
of God? For look, she is completely paralyzed on one side and lies there in the
corner, helpless. We see people you have healed, but your own daughter you
have neglected.”
Peter smiled and said to him, “My son, it is clear to God alone why her body
is not sound. Be assured that God is not weak or unable to extend his grace to
my daughter. But so that your soul may be convinced and those here may
increase their faith—“
He looked at his daughter and said to her, “Get up from your place without
any help except from Jesus, and walk, before all these people, healed. Come to
me.”
She got up and went over to him, and the crowd rejoiced at what happened.
Peter said to them, “Look, your hearts are convinced that God is not powerless
regarding anything we ask of him.” Then they rejoiced even more and praised
God.
Peter Makes His Daughter Return to Her Paralyzed State (130, 18–132, 7)
Peter said to his daughter, “Now go back to your place, lie down, and
become an invalid again, for this is better for both of us.” The girl returned, lay
down in her place, and became as she was before. The whole crowd wept and
begged Peter to make her well.
Peter said to them, “As the Lord lives, this is better for both of us. For on
the day she was born I had a vision, and the Lord said to me, ‘Peter, today a
great trial has been born to you. For this girl will harm many souls if her
body stays healthy.’ But I thought the vision was mocking me.

Peter Tells the Story of His Daughter and Ptolemy
(132, 7–135, 17)
“When the girl was ten years old, she became a temptation to many. A wealthy
man named Ptolemy saw the girl bathing with her mother and sent for her to take
her as his wife, but her mother would not agree. He sent for her again and again.
He could not stop.......
“[The servants of] Ptolemy [brought] the girl back and laid her down at
the door of the house, and then they left. When her mother and I became aware
of it, we went down and found the girl completely paralyzed and disabled on one
side of her body, from head to toe. We carried her off, and praised the Lord for
having saved his servant from defilement, shame, and [destruction]. This is the
reason why the girl [remains] in this condition to this day.
What Happened to Ptolemy Thereafter (135, 17–139, 17)
“Now, you should know what happened to Ptolemy. He was sick of heart
and grieved night and day over what happened to him, and because of the many
tears he shed, he became blind. He decided to go and hang himself. And look, in
the ninth hour of that day, when he was alone in his bedroom, he saw a bright
light that lit up the whole house, and he heard a voice that said to him,
‘Ptolemy, God has not given vessels for corruption and shame. And it was not
right for you, a believer in me, to defile my virgin, whom you should recognize
as your sister, since I have become one spirit for both of you. But get up and
hurry to the house of the apostle Peter, and you will behold my glory. He will
explain this to you.’
“Ptolemy did not delay. He ordered his servants to show him the way
and bring him to me. And when he arrived, he told me everything that had
happened to him, in the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then he saw with the
eyes of his flesh and the eyes of his soul. Many people set their hopes in Christ,
and Ptolemy did good things for them and gave them the gift of God.
“After this Ptolemy died. He departed this life and went to be with his Lord.
 And [when he made] his will, he left a piece of land in the name of my
daughter, since it was through her that he believed in God and was saved. I
myself was entrusted with the administration of the will, and I attended to it
most carefully. I sold the land, and, God alone knows, neither I nor my
daughter kept anything from the price of the land, but I gave all the money to
the poor.

The End of the Story (139, 18–141, 7)
“So, O servant of Christ Jesus, understand that God takes care of his own
and prepares what is good for each one of them, even though we think God has
forgotten us. Now then, brothers and sisters, let’s be penitent and watch and
pray. The goodness of God will look down upon us, and we are awaiting it.”
Peter continued speaking before them all and, praising the name of the
Lord Christ, he gave bread to them all. When he had distributed it, he got up
and went home.
The Act of Peter 
Colophon (142, 1–3)
God of [Gods]
God of Gods
Lord of Lords
King of Kings