The Revelation of Peter
The Savior Speaks with Peter in the Temple
(70, 13–72, 4)
The Savior was sitting in the temple, in the three hundredth <year> since its
foundation, <in the month of> the completion of the tenth pillar, and he was at
rest in the plentitude of the living, incorruptible Majesty. He said to me, “Peter,
blessed are those who belong to the Father, for they are above the heavens. It is
he who through me revealed life to people from life. I reminded those built on
what is strong that they should listen to my teaching and learn to tell the
difference between words of unrighteousness or lawlessness and words of
righteousness, which come from the height of every word of the fullness of
truth. These people have been enlightened in good pleasure by him whom the
principalities sought but did not find, nor was he proclaimed among any of the
generations of the prophets; now I have appeared among these people as the
Son of Humanity, exalted above the heavens, among a <huge number> of
people of the same nature.
“Peter, you are to become perfect in keeping with your name, along with
me, the one who has chosen you, for through you I have begun a work for the
remnant whom I called to knowledge. So be strong until the imitator of
righteousness <…> of the one who first called you. He called you so that you
might understand him properly with regard to the distinction between the sinews
of his hands and feet and the crowning by those of the middle region over
against his radiant body. He will be brought in hope of providing a reward
of honor, and tonight he will reprove you three times.”
The Priests and the People Threaten Jesus and Peter
(72, 4–73, 23)
When he said this, I saw the priests and the people running toward us with stones
as if they would kill us, and I was afraid we would die.

He said to me, “Peter, I have told you many times that they are blind and
have no leader. If you want to know their blindness, put your hands on the eyes
of your garment and tell me what you see.”
When I did this, I saw nothing, and I said, “No one sees in this way.”
Then he told me, “Do it again.”
Fear and joy arose in me, for I saw a new light brighter than the light of
day, and it came down on the Savior. I told him what I saw.
He said to me again, “Put your hands to your ears and listen to what the
priests and the people are saying.”
I listened to the priests as they were sitting with the scholars, and the
multitude was shouting with a loud voice.
When he heard what I said about this, he said to me, “Use your ears and
listen to what they are saying.”
I listened again. “They are praising you as you are sitting here.”
When I said this, the Savior replied, “I have told you that these people are
blind and deaf. Now listen to the things I am telling you in secret and keep them.
Do not tell them to the children of this age. For they will denounce you during
these ages, since they are ignorant of you, but they will praise you when there is
knowledge.
Some First Follow the True Savior, but Then
Turn Away to Worship a Dead Man (73, 23–75, 7)
“At first many will accept our words, but they will turn away again according to
the will of the father of their error, because they have done his will, and the
father of error will disclose them in his judgment as servants of the word. Those
who have associated with people of error will become their prisoners, since
they are without perception. But the good person, who is pure and upright, will
be handed over to the dealer in death, in the kingdom of those who praise a
Christ of a future restored world. And they also praise people who preach this
falsehood, people who will come after you. They will hold on to the name of a
dead man, thinking that in this way they will become pure, but instead they will
become more and more defiled. They will fall into a name of error and into the
hand of an evil deceiver with complicated doctrines, and they will be dominated
by heresy.
“Some of them will blaspheme the truth and proclaim evil teachings, and
they will speak evil against each other. Some of them will give themselves a
name, for they stand in the power of the rulers: the name of a man and a naked
woman of many forms and many sufferings. And those who say all this

will inquire into dreams, and if they claim that a dream came from a demon,
which is appropriate for their error, they shall be granted perdition instead of
incorruption.
Mortal Souls Are Different from Immortal Souls (75, 7–76, 23)
“Evil cannot produce good fruit. Everything, wherever it comes from, produces
what is like it. Not every soul is of the truth or of immortality. In our opinion,
every soul of these present times is assigned to death and is always enslaved,
since this soul is created to serve its own desires. These souls are destined for
eternal destruction, in which they are and from which they are, for they love the
creatures of matter that came into being with them.
“But immortal souls are not like these, Peter. Still, as long as the hour has
not yet come, an immortal soul resembles mortal souls. It will not reveal its
true nature: it alone is immortal and contemplates immortality, and has
faith, and desires to renounce these mortal souls.
“People do not gather figs from thistles or thorns, if they are wise, nor grapes
from thornbushes. Something always stays in that state in which it exists. If
something is in a bad state, that becomes destruction and death for the soul. But
the soul abides in the eternal one, the source of life and immortality of life
that these resemble.
“All that does not really exist will dissolve into nothingness, and those who
are deaf and blind associate only with people like them.
Some Church Leaders Lack Knowledge and Lead People
Astray (76, 23–78, 31)
“Others will wander from evil words and mysteries that lead people astray. Some
who do not understand the mysteries and speak of what they do not understand
will boast that the mystery of truth is theirs alone. In arrogance they will
embrace pride and will envy the immortal soul that has been used as down
payment. For every authority, principality, and power of the ages wants to be
with the immortal souls in the created world, in order that these powers, who do
not come from what exists and have forgotten who they are, may be glorified by
the immortal souls that do exist. The powers have not been saved or shown the
way by them, though they always have wished to become imperishable. For if an
immortal soul is empowered by a spirit of thought, at once it is joined by one of
those who were led astray.
“Many others, who oppose truth and are messengers of error, will ordain

their error and their law against my pure thoughts. Since they see from one
perspective only, they think that good and evil come from the same source. They
do business in my word. And they will establish harsh fate in which the
generation of immortal souls will run in vain, until my return. For the immortal
souls will surely remain among them. And I have forgiven the transgressions
into which they have fallen through their adversaries, and I have redeemed them
from their slavery, to give them freedom.
“Some will create a mere imitation of the remnant in the name of a dead
man, who is Hermas, the firstborn of unrighteousness, in order that the little
ones may not believe in the light that is. These are the workers who will be cast
into the outer darkness, away from the children of light. For they will not enter,
nor do they allow those who are going to their destination, for their deliverance,
to enter.
Others, Who Are Martyrs, Bishops, and Deacons, Are Dry
Canals (78, 31–79, 31)
“Still others among them endure suffering and think they will perfect the
wisdom of the brotherhood that really exists, the spiritual fellowship with those
united in communion, through which the wedding of incorruptibility will be
revealed. Instead, what will appear is a mere imitation, the kindred generation of
the sisterhood. These people oppress their brothers and say to them, ‘Through
this fellowship our God has mercy, since salvation comes to us alone through
this.’ They do not know the punishment of those who rejoice at what was done
to the little ones, those who watched when the little ones were taken captive.
“And there are others among those outside our number who call themselves
bishops and deacons, as if they have received authority from God, but they bow
before the judgment of the leaders. These people are dry canals.”
The Little Ones Eventually Will Reign (79, 31–81, 3)
I said, “I am afraid because of what you have told me. Although there are
only a few phonies among us, there are many others who lead astray and
subdue multitudes of living ones. And when they speak your name, people will
believe them.”
The Savior replied, “For a specified time proportionate to their error, they
will rule over the little ones. And after the completion of error, the being of
immortal understanding, who does not grow old, will become new, and the little
ones will rule over their rulers. That being will pull out their error by its root,

and put it to shame and expose it for all the liberties it has taken. Peter, such
people will never change.
“Come, let’s proceed to the fulfillment of the good pleasure of the
incorruptible Father. For look, those who will bring judgment on themselves are
approaching and will put themselves to shame. They cannot touch me. Peter, you
will stand in their midst, but don’t be afraid, though you are fainthearted.
Their understanding will be gone, for the invisible one has taken a stand against
them.”
Peter Sees the Crucifixion and the Savior Explains It
(81, 3–82, 3)
When he said this, I saw him apparently being arrested by them. I said, “What do
I see, Lord? Is it really you they are seizing, and are you holding on to me? And
who is the one smiling and laughing above the cross? Is it someone else whose
feet and hands they are hammering?”
The Savior said to me, “The one you see smiling and laughing above the
cross is the living Jesus. The one into whose hands and feet they are driving nails
is his fleshly part, the substitute for him. They are putting to shame the one who
came into being in the likeness of the living Jesus. Look at him and look at me.”
When I looked, I said, “Lord, no one sees you. Let’s get out of here.”
He answered me, “I told you they are blind. Forget about them. Look at how
they do not know what they are saying. For they have put to shame the son
of their own glory instead of the one who serves me.”
The Savior Appears to Peter in a Bright Light (82, 3–83, 15)
Then I saw someone about to approach us who looked like the one laughing
above the cross, but this one was intertwined with holy spirit, and he was the
Savior. And there was an unspeakably bright light surrounding them and a
multitude of ineffable and invisible angels praising them. When the one who
glorifies was revealed, I myself saw him.
He said to me, “Be strong, for these mysteries have been given to you so that
you might know clearly that the one they crucified is the firstborn, the abode of
demons, the stone vessel in which they live, the man of Elohim, the man of the
cross, who is under the law. But the one who is standing near him is the living
Savior, who was in him at first and was arrested but was set free. He is standing
and observing with pleasure that those who did evil to him are divided among
themselves. And he is laughing at their lack of perception, knowing that

they were born blind. The one capable of suffering must remain, since the body
is the substitute, but what was set free was my bodiless body. I am the spirit of
thought filled with radiant light. The one you saw approaching me is our fullness
of thought, which unites the perfect light with my holy spirit.
The Savior Tells Peter to Proclaim What Has Been Revealed
(83, 15–84, 14)
“You are to present what you have seen to those who are strangers, who are not
of this age. For there will be no grace among those who are not immortal, but
only among those chosen because of their immortal nature, which has shown it
can receive the one who gives in abundance.
“For this reason I have said, Whoever has will be given more, and this
person will have in abundance. But whoever does not have—that is, the person
of this world, who is completely dead, who derives from the planting of
creation and procreation, who thinks he can lay hold of someone else of
immortal nature when such a person appears—this will be taken away from that
person and added to whatever exists.
“So be courageous and fear nothing. For I shall be with you that none of your
enemies may prevail over you. Peace be with you. Be strong.”
When the Savior said these things, Peter came to his senses.
