The Teachings of Silvanus
Let Your Mind Be Your Guide (84, 15–85, 29)
Put an end to every kind of immature conduct. Acquire for yourself strength of
mind and soul, and strengthen your struggle against every kind of foolishness
consisting of the passions of erotic love, base wickedness, love of praise,
fondness for strife, tiresome jealousy, wrath, anger, and avaricious desire.
Guard your encampment with weapons and spears. Arm yourself
with all the soldiers, which are words,
with the commanders, which are counsels,
and with your mind as a guiding principle.
My child, throw every robber out of your gates. Guard all your gates with
torches, which are the words, and by these means you will acquire a tranquil
life.
But the person who will not guard these things will become like a captured
city, desolate and trampled by wild animals. For thoughts that are not good are
evil beasts. Your city will be filled with robbers, and you will not obtain peace,
only all kinds of savage beasts. The evil one, who is a tyrant, is lord over them.
While he is directing this he dwells beneath the great mud. The whole city,
which is your soul, will suffer destruction.
Remove yourself from all these things, O wretched soul. Bring in your guide
and your teacher. The mind is the guide, and reason is the teacher. They will
bring you out of the dangers of destruction.
Be a Human Being, Not an Animal (85, 29–86, 13)
Listen, my child, to my advice. Don’t show your back [to] your enemies and run
away. Instead, go after them as a [strong person]. Don’t be an animal, with
men pursuing you; instead, be a human being, with you pursuing the evil beasts,
lest somehow they prevail over you and trample you like a corpse and you perish

through their wickedness. O you poor man, what will you do if you fall into their
hands? Watch yourself, that you not be given over to your enemies.
Your Mind and Reason Will Protect You (86, 13–87, 4)
Entrust yourself to this pair of friends, reason and mind, and no one will prevail
over you. May God dwell in your camp, may his Spirit protect your gates, and
may the divine Mind protect the walls. Let holy reason become a torch in your
mind, burning the wood which is all sin.
If you do these things, O my child, you will prevail over all your enemies,
and they will not be able to wage war against you. They will neither be able to
stand firm, nor be able to get in your way. For if you encounter these, you will
despise them as mere gnats. They will speak to you with [cajolery] and
entreaties, not because they are [afraid] of you, but because they are afraid
of those who dwell within you, the guardians of the divine teaching.
Attend to Your Education (87, 4–88, 34)
My child, accept for yourself the education and the teaching. Do not flee from
the education and the teaching, but when you are taught accept it joyfully. And
when you are educated in any subject, do what is good. You will weave a crown
of education by your guiding principle. Put on the holy teaching like a robe.
Make yourself noble by your good conduct. Gain for yourself the austerity of
good discipline. Judge yourself like a wise judge. Do not stray from my teaching
and develop ignorance, lest you lead your people astray. Do not flee from the
divine and the teaching within you, for your teacher loves you very much and
will leave you a worthy austerity.
Throw out the animal nature that is within you, and don’t give access to bad
thought. For it is a beautiful thing for you to attain maturity by knowing the way
I am teaching you. If it is good to rule over the [few], as you see it, [how] much
better it is for you to rule over everyone, since you are exalted above every
congregation and every people and prominent in every respect with divine
reason. You have become master over every power that kills the soul.
My child, does anyone want to be a slave? Why, then, do you trouble
yourself for the wrong reason? My child, do not fear anyone except God alone,
the exalted one. Cast away from you the deceitfulness of the devil. Accept the
light for your eyes, and cast the darkness from you. Live in Christ, and you will
obtain treasure in heaven. Don’t become a bag stuffed with many useless things,
and don’t become a guide for your blind ignorance.

My child, listen to my good and useful teaching, and bring an end to the
sleep that weighs heavily upon you. Come away from the forgetfulness that fills
you with darkness. For if you were powerless to do anything, I would not have
said these things to you.
But Christ came to give you this gift. Why do you pursue the darkness when
the light is at your disposal? Why do you drink brackish water when sweet water
is available to you?
Wisdom Summons You (88, 35–89, 26)
Wisdom summons [you], yet you desire folly. It is not by your own wish
that you do these things, but it is the animal nature within you that does them.
Wisdom summons you in her goodness, saying, “Come to me, all of you foolish
ones, that you may receive as a gift the understanding that is good and excellent.
I am giving you a high-priestly vestment that is woven from every kind of
wisdom.”
What else is evil darkness except familiarity with forgetfulness? Cast your
anxiety upon God alone. Do not become a lover of gold and silver, which have
no profit in them. But clothe yourself with wisdom like a robe, put knowledge on
yourself like a crown, and be seated upon a throne of perception. These are
yours, and you will receive them again on high at another time.
The Foolish Person’s Folly (89, 26–90, 28)
For a foolish person puts on folly like a robe, and like a garment of sorrow he
puts on shame. He crowns himself with ignorance, and seats himself on a throne
of [incomprehension]. Since he is [irrational], he leads only himself astray,
for he is guided by ignorance, and he follows the ways of every passionate
desire.
He swims in life’s desires—and has already sunk to the depths—thinking
that he finds profit in doing things that are of no profit. The poor wretch who
goes through all these things will die because he does not have the mind as a
helmsman. But he is like a ship tossed to and fro by the wind, and like a loose
horse that has no rider. For this person needed the rider, which is reason. The
poor wretch went astray because he didn’t want advice. He was tossed to and fro
by three evils: he got for himself death as a father, ignorance as a mother, and
evil counsels he got as friends and brothers. O fool, you ought to weep for
yourself.

Return to Your Divine Nature (90, 29–92, 10)
From now on, then, my child, return to your divine nature. Cast from [yourself]
these evil, deceiving friends. [Take for] yourself Christ, the true friend, as a
good teacher. Cast death from yourself, which had become a father to you. For
death did not exist at first, nor will it exist in the end. But since you cast from
yourself God, the holy Father, the true life, the spring of life, you have
consequently inherited death as your father, and ignorance you have gotten as
your mother. They have robbed you of the true knowledge.
My child, return to your first father, God, and Wisdom, your mother, from
whom you came into being from the beginning. Return, that you might fight
against all of your enemies, the powers of the adversary.
My child, listen to my advice. Do not be arrogant, opposing every good
opinion, but take for your <teacher> of divinity the Word. Keep the holy
commandments of Jesus Christ, and you will reign over every place on earth,
and be honored by the angels and archangels. Then you will acquire them as
friends and fellow servants, and you will get for yourself places in [heaven
above].
Do not bring grief and trouble to the divine [which is] within you. But
when you foster it, request of it that you remain pure, and become self-controlled
in your soul and body. Then you will become a throne of wisdom and a member
of God’s household. He will give you a great light through it.
Know Yourself (92, 10–94, 29)
But before everything else, know yourself, that is, from what substance you
are, or from what race, or from what species. Understand that you have come
into being from three races: from the earth, from the formed, and from the
created. The body came into being from the earth with an earthly substance, but
the formed, for the sake of the soul, came into being from the thought of the
divine. The created, however, is the mind that came into being according to the
image of God. The divine mind has substance from the divine, but the soul is
that which he formed within them. For I think it exists as wife of what came into
being according to the image. But as for the body that came into being from the
earth, its substance is matter. [If] you mix yourself, you will get for [yourself]
the three parts as you fall from heavenly virtue into earthly inferiority.
Live in accordance with the mind. Don’t think about the things of the flesh.
Get strength for yourself, because the mind is strong. If you fall from this other,
you have become a female male. And if you cast out of yourself the substance of

the mind, which is thought, you have cut off the male part and turned yourself
to the female part alone. You have become psychical, since you have received
the substance of the formed. When you cast out this last part, so as not to get a
human part—you have thus taken for yourself the animal thought and likeness—
you have become fleshly by taking on an animal nature.
It is difficult to find a psychical person; how much more so to find the Lord!
I say that God is the spiritual one. Human beings have taken shape from the
substance of God. The divine soul shares partly in him. Moreover the soul shares
partly in the flesh. The base soul tends to turn from one side to the other.
How would it seem to truth? [It is good] for you, O man, to turn
yourself toward the human rather than the animal nature, I mean the fleshly
nature. You will take on the likeness of the part toward which you turn yourself.
I’ll tell you something else: Once again, in what will you take pleasure?
Did you wish to become animal when you came into this kind of nature?
Wouldn’t you rather take part in a true nature of life? Animality will guide you
into the earthly race, but the intellectual nature will guide you to intelligible
forms. Turn toward the intellectual nature, and cast from yourself the earthengendered nature.
O obstinate soul, be sober and shake off your drunkenness, which is the work
of ignorance. If you are obstinate and live in the body, you dwell in a boorish
condition. When you entered into a bodily birth, you were begotten. <When you
were born again,> you came to be inside the bridal chamber, and you were
illuminated in mind.
Beware of the Adversary (94, 29–97, 3)
My child, do not swim in just any kind of water, and do not allow yourself to be
defiled by strange kinds of knowledge. Don’t you know that the schemes
of the adversary are not few, and that he has a variety of tricks? They have
especially robbed the <foolish> person of the proverbial snake’s shrewdness.
For it is right for you to be in agreement with these two, with the snake’s
shrewdness and the dove’s innocence. Otherwise, he will come to you in the
guise of a flatterer and true friend, saying, “I advise good things for you.” But if
you received him as a true friend, you did not recognize this one’s deceitfulness.
For he casts into our heart evil thoughts disguised as good ones, hypocrisy as
secure shrewdness, avarice as conservative frugality, love of glory as what is
beautiful, boastfulness and pride as great austerity, and godlessness as [great]
godliness. For the one who says, “I have many gods,” is godless. And he
casts spurious knowledge into your heart disguised as mysterious sayings.

Who will be able to comprehend his thoughts and various devices? For those
who wish to accept him as king he is a “great mind.” My child, how will you be
able to comprehend this one’s schemes or his soul-killing counsel? For his
devices and the schemes of his wickedness are many. And how will you be able
to perceive his ways of entry, that is, how he will enter your soul? And how will
you be able to perceive in what garment he will enter you?
Accept Christ, who is able to set you free. He has taken on that one’s
devices, so that through these he might destroy him with guile! For this is the
king you have, who is forever invincible. Against him no one will be able to
fight or speak a word. This is your king and your father. There is none like him.
The divine teacher is with [you at] all times as a helper. He meets you
because of the good you have within you.
Watch Your Speech (97, 3–17)
Do not put a malicious word in your disposition. For every malicious person
harms only himself. Only a foolish person walks toward his own destruction,
but a wise person knows his way. A foolish person does not keep from telling a
secret. A wise person, on the other hand, does not blurt out every word, but
scrutinizes those who hear. Don’t utter every word in the presence of those you
don’t know.
Do Not Trust Anyone as a Friend
(97, 18–98, 8)
Have a good number of friends, but not many counselors. First, examine your
counselor, and don’t honor anyone who flatters. Their speech is sweet as
honey, but their hearts are full of poison. For whenever they think they have
become a reliable friend, then they will deceitfully turn against you and throw
you down into the mud.
Do not trust anyone as a friend. For the whole world has become deceitful,
and every [person] is troubled [in vain]. All things [of] the world are
without profit; they happen in vain. There is no real <friend>, not even a
brother, since each person seeks his own advantage. My child, do not have
anyone as a friend. If you acquire one, do not entrust yourself to him.
Entrust Yourself to God Alone (98, 8–20)
Entrust yourself to God alone, both as father and as friend. For everyone goes

about in deceit. The whole earth is full of suffering and pain, things in which
there is no profit. If you wish to lead your life in tranquility, do not keep
company with anyone. Even if you do keep company with them, be as if you do
not. Be pleasing to God, and you will not need anyone.
Christ Is the True Light (98, 20–99, 15)
Live with Christ, and he will save you. For he is the true light and the sun of
life. Just as the visible sun shines on physical eyes, so Christ illuminates every
mind and heart. For if one who is wicked during his lifetime has an evil death,
how much more so does one who has a blind mind. For every blind person
[remains incapable] of seeing it. [So it is] with people who do not have a
sound mind. They do not delight in acquiring the light of Christ, which is
reason.
For everything visible is a copy of what is invisible. As a fire burns in a
place without being confined to it, so it is with the sun in the sky: all of its rays
extend to places on earth. It is a single being that Christ has, and he gives light
to every place.
Is the Mind in a Place? (99, 15–28)
This is also the way he speaks about our mind, using the image of a lamp
burning and lighting up the whole place. <Existing> only in a part of the soul,
it still gives light to all the parts of the body.
In addition, I will say something more important. The mind, in terms of its
actual being, is in a place, which means it is in the body. But in terms of the
thought process, the mind is not in a place. For how can it be in a place when it
contemplates every place?
God Is Incorporeal and in No Place (99, 29–100, 13)
But we are able to say something still more important than this. Do not think in
yourself that God is [in a] place. If you localize the [Lord of] all in a place,
then you could say that the place is more exalted than the one who dwells in it.
For what contains is superior to what is contained.
For there is no place that can be called incorporeal. It is not right for us to
say that God is corporeal. The consequence would be that we attribute both
<increase> and decrease to the body, and also that one who is subject to these
will not remain imperishable.

Knowledge of God Comes Through Knowledge of Christ
(100, 13–31)
Now, the creator of all creatures is not difficult to know, but it is impossible to
comprehend what he is like. For it is not only difficult for human beings to
comprehend God, but it is also difficult for every divine nature, the angels and
the archangels. For it is necessary to know God in the way he is. You cannot
know God through any means except through Christ, who bears the image of the
Father. For this image reveals the true likeness of God in a visible way. A king is
usually not known apart from an image.
God Is Everywhere and Nowhere (100, 31–101, 13)
Consider these things about God: He is in every place; on the other hand, he is in
[no] place. [In terms of power], he is in every place, but in terms of
divinity, he is in no place. So, then, it is possible to know God a little. In terms of
his power, he fills every place, but in his exalted divinity nothing contains him.
Everything is in God, but God is not in anything. What is it to know God?
Everything that partakes of the truth is God.
Christ Is the Light of the Father (101, 13–102, 7)
But it is as impossible to look at Christ as it is to look at the sun. God sees
everyone; no one looks at him. Christ receives and gives ungrudgingly. He is the
light of the Father. Thus, he sheds light on every place. Christ is All, who has
inherited everything from the One Who Is. For the All is Christ, apart from his
incorruptibility.
When you consider sin, it is not anything real.
The apprehension of imperishability is the apprehension of Christ. He is the
light shining undefiled. For the sun shines on every impure place, yet it is not
defiled.
So it is with Christ. Even if he is in deficiency, yet he is without deficiency.
Even if [he was begotten] he is unbegotten. So it is with Christ: if, on the
one hand, he is comprehensible, on the other, he is incomprehensible in terms of
his actual being. Christ is the All. Whoever does not possess the All cannot
know Christ.
God Is Ineffable (102, 7–22)
My child, do not dare to speak a word about this One, and do not confine the

God of all to mental images. For will the one who condemns not be judged by
the One who condemns? It is good to ask and to know who God is. “Reason”
and “mind”77 are masculine nouns. Let the person who wishes to know about this
One ask quietly and reverently. For there is no small danger in speaking about
these things, since you know that you will be judged on the basis of everything
you say.
The Light Comes from Above (102, 23–103, 11)
Understand by this that the one who is in darkness will not be able to see
anything without receiving the light, by which means he can see. Examine
yourself, to see whether you really have the light, so that if you ask about these
things, you may understand how you will escape. For many are seeking in
darkness, and they grope about wishing to understand, since there is no light for
them.
My child, do not let your mind stare downward, but rather let it look
with the light at things above. For light always comes from above. Even if it is
located on earth, let it seek to pursue the things above. Illuminate your mind with
heavenly light, so that you may turn toward the light of heaven.
Walk in the Way of Christ (103, 11–33)
Do not tire of knocking on the door of the Word, and do not cease walking in the
way of Christ. Walk in it that you may receive rest from your labors. If you walk
in another way, the way you take is of no profit. For those who walk in the broad
way will in the end go down to muddy perdition. For the underworld is wide
open to the soul, and the place of perdition is broad. Accept Christ, the narrow
way. For he is oppressed and bears affliction for your sin.
O obstinate soul, in what ignorance you exist! For who is your guide into
the darkness? How many likenesses did Christ take on because of you!
Christ’s Saving Work (103, 34–104, 14)
Although he was divine, he [was found] among humans as a human.
He descended to the underworld. He released the children of death. They
were suffering birth pangs, as the scripture of God has said, and he sealed the
heart within it. He completely broke its strong bows. And when all the
powers had seen him they fled, so that he might bring you, poor wretch, up from
the abyss and die for you as a ransom for your sin. He saved you from the

strong hand of the underworld.
Choose the Gift of Christ (104, 15–24)
But as for you, give him utterly and completely your assent by taking decisive
action, that he may take you up with joy. That assent is the gift of Christ, which
is humility of heart. The acceptable sacrifice is a contrite heart. If you humble
yourself, you will be greatly exalted; and if you exalt yourself, you will be
exceedingly humbled.
Guard Yourself Against Evil (104, 24–106, 22)
My child, guard yourself against evil, and do not let the spirit of evil throw you
down into the abyss. For he is mad and bitter. He is terrifying, and throws
everyone he can into a pit of mud.
It is a very good thing not to love fornication, and not even to think of that
wretched subject at all, for to think of it is death. It is not a good thing for
any person to fall into death. For a soul that is dead will be without reason. It is
better not to live at all than to acquire an animal’s life. Watch yourself, so that
you are not burned by the fires of fornication. Many shooters of the arrow are
slaves to it. These whom you don’t know are your enemies.
O my child, strip off the old garment of fornication, and put on the clean and
shining garment. In it you are beautiful. When you have this garment, protect it
well. Release yourself from every bond, that you may acquire freedom for
yourself. If you cast away from yourself desire, with its many devices, and
release yourself from sins of pleasure, <…>.
Listen, O soul, to my advice. Do not become a nest of foxes and snakes, or
a hole for lizards and asps, or a lair for lions, or a shelter for vipers. When
these things happen to you, O soul, what will you do? For these are the powers
 of the adversary. Through them everything dead will gain entrance to
you. For their food is everything dead and everything impure. When these are
within you, what living thing will come into you? The living angels will detest
you. You were a temple, but you made yourself a tomb. Stop being a tomb, and
become a temple again, that uprightness and divinity may remain in you. Light
the light within you, and don’t put it out. For no one lights a lamp for wild
animals or their young.
Raise your dead who have died. For they were once living, and they died on
your account. Give them life, and they will live again. For the tree of life is
Christ.

Christ Is the Wisdom of God (106, 22–107, 25)
He is Wisdom.
He is Wisdom and also the Word.
He is the life, the power, and the door.
He is the light, the angel, and the good shepherd.
Entrust yourself to this one who became all for your sake. Knock on your
inner self as upon a door, and walk within yourself as on a straight road. For if
you walk on the road, you won’t be able to go astray. And if you knock on
this one, you knock on hidden treasures.
Since he is Wisdom, he makes the foolish person wise. She is a holy
kingdom and a shining robe. Having much gold, she gives you great honor.
The Wisdom of God became for your sake a foolish form, that she might
pick you up, O foolish one, and make you wise.
And the life died for you when he was powerless, so that through his death
he might give life to you who once were dead.
Entrust yourself to the Word, and remove yourself from animality. It is clear
what an animal is: one who lacks reason. For many think they have reason, but if
you take a good look at them, their speech is animality.
Drink of the True Vine (107, 26–108, 3)
Give yourself gladness from the true vine of Christ. Satisfy yourself with the
true wine in which there is neither drunkenness nor dregs. The true wine entails
the end of drinking, since it can give joy to the soul and mind through the Spirit
of God. But first, before you drink of it, nurture your reasoning powers.
Avoid Sin (108, 3–17)
Do not stab yourself with the sword of sin. Do not burn yourself, O wretched
one, with the fire of pleasure. Do not surrender yourself to barbarians like a
prisoner, or to savage beasts that want to trample you. For they are like lions
roaring very loudly. Don’t be a corpse, or they will trample you. Since you are
human, it is possible for you through reasoning to conquer them.
The Rational Person Fears God (108, 17–109, 4)
The person who does nothing worthy <of God is> not the rational person. The
rational person is the one who fears God. The one who fears God does nothing
insolent. The one who keeps himself from doing anything insolent is someone

who keeps his guiding principle. This person, though existing on earth as a
human being, makes himself like God. The one who makes himself like God
is someone who does nothing <un>worthy of God. According to the statement of
Paul this person is one who has become like Christ.
Who can worship God without wanting to do things that are pleasing to
God? For worship of God is something that comes from the heart, and
worship of God from the heart characterizes every soul that is near to God.
Where Christ Is, Sin Is Idle (109, 4–11)
The soul that is a member of God’s household is one that is kept pure, and the
soul that has put on Christ is one that is pure, and it is impossible for it to
sin. Where Christ is, sin is idle.
Let Christ Enter Your World (109, 11–110, 14)
Let Christ alone enter your world, and let him bring to nothing all powers that
have come upon you. Let him enter the temple that is within you, that he might
throw out all the merchants. Let him dwell in your inner temple, and you
become for him a priest and a Levite entering in purity.
Blessed are you, O soul, if you find this one in your temple. Blessed are
you still more if you perform his service.
But whoever defiles God’s temple God will destroy. For you are revealed
for what you are, O man, if you throw this one out of your temple. For
whenever the enemies do not see Christ in you, then they will come into you
armed in order to crush you.
O my child, I have given you orders about these things many times, so
that you would always guard your soul. It is not you who will throw him out, but
he will throw you out. For if you flee from him, you will fall into great sin.
Again, if you flee from him, you will become food for your enemies. All who
are worthless run away from their masters, and the person who is worthless in
terms of virtue and wisdom runs away from Christ. Everyone who is separated
from him falls into the paws of the wild beasts.
Know Who Christ Is (110, 14–111, 20)
Know who Christ is, and acquire him as a friend, for he is the true friend. He is
also God and teacher. He, being divine, became human for your sake.
He is the one who broke the underworld’s iron bars and bronze bolts.

He is the one who attacked and threw down every arrogant tyrant,
the one who loosened the bonds with <which he> was being held,
and brought up the poor from the abyss and the mourners from the
underworld,
the one who humbled the arrogant powers,
the one who, through humility, put arrogance to shame,
the one who, through weakness, threw down the strong and the boaster,
the one who, through his shame, scorned what is thought to be
honorable,
that humility for God’s sake might be highly exalted,
the one who put on humanity and is God, the divine Word,
the one who always bears patiently with humanity,
and wished to instill humility in the exalted one.
The one who has exalted humanity became like <humanity>, not that he
might bring God down to humanity but that humanity might become like God.
O this great goodness of God!
O Christ, king who have revealed to humans the great divinity,
king of every virtue and king of life,
king of the ages and Great One of the heavens,
Hear my words and forgive me!
Where Is Wisdom? (111, 20–112, 8)
Furthermore, he manifested a great zeal for piety: “Where is a wise person or
one powerful in intelligence, or a person whose wanderings are many because he
knows wisdom? Let him speak wisdom; let him utter great boasting! For
everyone has become foolish.”135
He spoke of his own knowledge when he said, “He confounded the
counsels of guileful people, and caught those wise in their own understanding.
Who will be able to discover the counsel of the Almighty, or describe divinity, or
express it correctly?”138
If we have not been able to understand the counsel of our companions, who
will be able to comprehend divinity or the heavenly divinities? If we scarcely
find things on earth, who will search for heavenly things?
Everything Has Been Made New (112, 8–27)

A great power and a great glory has been revealed to the world. And the life of
heaven wishes to make everything new, that he may cast out what is weak and
every black garment, and everyone shine with great brilliance in heavenly
garments, to make manifest the command of the Father. And, that he might
crown those wishing to contend well, Christ is the judge of the contest and the
one who has given each one the crown. He teaches everyone to contend—he
who, as the first contender, received the crown, gained the victory, and appeared,
giving light to everyone. Everything has been made new through the Holy Spirit
and the Mind.
Who Can Glorify God Adequately? (112, 27–37)
O Lord Almighty, how much praise shall I give you?
No one has been able to glorify God adequately.
It is you who have glorified your Word in order to save everyone, O
merciful God!
It is he who has come forth from your mouth,
the firstborn, Wisdom,
the prototype, the first light.
Hymn to Christ (112, 37–113, 23)
For he is light from the power of God,
and he is a <pure> emanation of the glory of the Almighty.
He is the spotless mirror of the activity of God,
and he is the image of his goodness.
For he is also the light of light forever.
He is the eye that looks at the invisible Father.
He is always serving and creating by the Father’s will,
he who alone was begotten by the Father’s good pleasure.
For he is an incomprehensible Word,
and he is Wisdom and life.
All living things and powers he vivifies and nourishes;
just as the soul gives life to all the members of the body.
He rules over all with power, and gives life to them.
For he is the beginning and the end of everyone.
He watches over all and encompasses them.

Christ Takes Pains on Behalf of Everyone (113, 24–31)
He takes pains on behalf of everyone, and he rejoices and also mourns. He
mourns for those who have gotten the place of punishment as their lot. On the
other hand, he takes pains on behalf of everyone whom he arduously brings to
instruction. And he rejoices over everyone who lives in purity.
Fight the Good Fight (113, 31–114, 30)
So take care that you not fall into the hands of the robbers. Do not give sleep to
your eyes or slumber to your eyelids, that you may be saved like a gazelle from
snares, and like a bird from a trap.
Fight the great fight as long as the contest lasts, while all the powers are
staring at you, not only the holy ones, but also all the powers of the adversary.
Woe to you if you are vanquished in the presence of everyone watching you! If
you fight the fight and gain the victory over the powers that fight against you,
you will bring great joy to everyone who is holy, and you will bring great grief
to your enemies. The judge of your contest is entirely helpful, since he wants
you to prevail.
Listen, my child, and do not be slow of hearing. Soar aloft like an eagle,
when you have left your old self behind. Fear God in all your acts, and glorify
him through good work. You know that every person who is not pleasing to God
is the child of perdition, and will go down to the abyss of the underworld.
O this patience of God, which bears with everyone, which desires that
everyone who has become subject to sin be saved!
God’s Hand in Creation (114, 30–115, 10)
But no one prevents him from doing what he wants. For who is stronger than
he, that he might prevent him? To be sure, it is he who touches the earth, causing
it to quake, and causing the mountains to give off smoke.
He it is who gathered the waters of such a great sea as in a wineskin,
and weighed all the water in the palm of his hand.
Only the hand of the Lord has created all these things.
This hand of the Father is Christ, and it fashions all things. Through it,
everything has come into being, since it became the mother of everything. It is
he alone, existing always as Son of the Father.
Christ the Divine Son (115, 10–23)

Consider these things about God: the Almighty who always exists was not
always reigning as king without also needing the divine Son. Everything
subsists in God, that is, the things that came into being through the Word, who
is the Son as the image of the Father. For God is near at hand, and not far off.
Where is his limit? Divine entities are all related to God.
God’s Gift to the Human Race (115, 23–35)
Therefore, if this divine agrees with you in anything, even partially, know that
the entire divine agrees with you. But this divine is not content with anything
evil. For it is this which teaches everyone about what is good. This is what God
has given to the human race, so that for this reason every human might be
superior to all the angels and the archangels.
God Is Both Hidden and Revealed (115, 36–117, 5)
God does not need to test anyone. He knows all things even before they
happen, and he knows the hidden things of the heart. They are all revealed and
found wanting in his presence. Let no one ever say that God is ignorant, for it is
not right to attribute ignorance to the creator of every creature. For even things
that are in darkness are before him like light.
So there is nothing hidden except God alone. But he is revealed to everyone,
yet very hidden. He is revealed because God knows everything. Even if people
do not wish to say it, they will be corrected by their hearts. He is hidden because
no one perceives the things of God. For he is incomprehensible and
unfathomable when it comes to knowing God’s counsel.
Further, it is difficult to search him out, difficult even to find Christ. For
he it is who dwells in every place and in no place. For no one who wants to
can know God as he is, not even Christ or the Spirit, or the chorus of angels, or
the archangels , together with the thrones of the spirits, and exalted
lordships, and the “great mind.”170 If you do not know yourself, you will not
be able to know any of these.
Concluding Exhortations (117, 5–118, 7)
Open the door for yourself, that you may know the One Who Is. Knock on
yourself, that the Word may open to you. For he is the door of faith and the
sharp sword. He became all for everyone, because he wishes to have mercy on
everyone.

My child, prepare yourself to escape from the world rulers of darkness and
the air of the sort that is full of powers. If you have Christ, you will prevail
over this whole world. What you open for yourself, you will open. What you
knock upon for yourself, you will knock upon, with benefit to yourself. Help
yourself, my child, by not proceeding with things in which there is no profit.
My child, first purify yourself for the outward life, that you may be able to
purify the inward.
Don’t be a merchant of the word of God.
Put all words to the test before you utter them.
Don’t wish to acquire honors that are insecure or the boastfulness that
brings you to ruin.
Accept for yourself the wisdom of Christ, who is patient and mild, and guard
this, O my child, knowing that God’s way is always profitable.
Colophon (118, 8–9)
Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior.
Indescribable Wonder!
