The Second Discourse of
Great Seth
Perfect Majesty, the Mother, and the Savior
(49, 10–20)
Perfect Majesty is at rest in ineffable light, in truth, the Mother of all things.
Since I alone am perfect, all of you attain to me on account of the word. For I
dwell with all the Majesty of the Spirit, who is a friend equally to us and to our
kin.
The Word and Baptism (49, 20–50, 1)
I have uttered a discourse for the glory of our Father, through his goodness and
imperishable thought, and this word comes from him. It is a matter fit for slavery
to say, We shall die with Christ, which means with imperishable and undefiled
thought. What an incomprehensible wonder! The scripture regarding the
ineffable water in use among us is this word: I am in you and you are in me, just
as the Father is in me <and in> you, with no guile at all.
The Call for the Salvation of Divine Thoughts (50, 1–51, 20)
Let’s call together an assembly. Let’s examine this creation of his and send
someone, just as he also examined thoughts in the regions below.
I said this to all the members of the whole vast assembly of the Majesty, so
that they rejoiced, and the entire household of the Father of truth rejoiced. Since
I am of them, I reminded them of the thoughts that had come from the undefiled
Spirit and had descended to the water—that is, to the regions below. A single
thought was in all of them, since it came from a single source. They expressed
their decision to me, and I concurred and went forth to reveal glory to my kin,
my friends in spirit.
Those in the world had been prepared by the will of our sister Sophia,
whose indiscretion was without guile. She was not sent out, nor did she request
anything from the realm of the All, the Majesty of the assembly, and the
Fullness when she first came to prepare homes and habitations for the

child of light. From the elements below she derived collaborators to construct
bodily dwellings for them, but in their vainglory they fell into ruin. Yet it was in
these dwellings that those in the world came to live. And since they were
prepared by Sophia, they are ready to receive the saving word of the ineffable
One and the Majesty of the assembly of all those who still are in waiting and
those who already are in me.
Coming to This World (51, 20–52, 10)
I approached a bodily dwelling and evicted the previous occupant, and I went
in. The whole multitude of archons was upset, and all the material stuff of the
rulers and the powers born of earth began to tremble at the sight of the figure
with a composite image. I was in it, and I did not look like the previous
occupant. He was a worldly person, but I, I am from above the heavens. I
did not defy them, and I became an anointed one, but neither did I reveal
myself to them in the love coming from me. Rather, I revealed that I am a
stranger to the regions below.
Unrest and Confusion in the World (52, 10–53, 27)
There was a great disturbance, with confusion and restlessness, in the whole
world and in the council of the archons.
Some were convinced when they saw the mighty deeds I accomplished. They
are of the generation of Adonaios and are descended from the one who fled
from the throne to Sophia of hope, since she had previously given indication
about us and all those with me. They all were moving about.
Others hurried to inflict every sort of punishment on me from the world ruler
and his accomplices. They were restless of mind about what they would plot
against me. They thought their majesty was everything, and they also told lies
about the human being and all the Majesty of the assembly. They were
incapable of knowing the Father of truth, the human being of Majesty. They
usurped the name through corruption and ignorance, <through> a flame of fire
and a vessel created for the destruction of Adam, made to conceal all those who
likewise are theirs.
The rulers from the realm of Yaldabaoth disclosed the circuit of the angels.
This is what humanity was seeking, that they might not know the true human, for
Adam the modeled creature appeared to them. So throughout their dwelling
place there was agitation and fear that the angels surrounding them might take a
stand against them.

For those offering praise I died, though not really, that their archangel might
be useless.
The Arrogance of the World Ruler (53, 27–55, 9)
Then the voice of the world ruler announced to the angels, “I am God, and there
is no other beside me.”24 I laughed heartily when I reflected upon how conceited
he was. He kept saying, over and over, “Who is the human being?”25 The
whole host of his angels, who had seen Adam and his dwelling place, laughed at
its insignificance. Thus their thought turned away from the heavenly Majesty,
who is the true human, whose name they perceived in the insignificance of a
dwelling place. They are inferior, senseless in their empty thought, in their
laughter, and so they were corrupted.
The entire Majesty of the Fatherhood of the Spirit was at rest in his realms,
and I was with him, since I have a thought of a single emanation from the eternal
and unknowable ones, undefiled and immeasurable. I disturbed and frightened
the whole multitude of the angels and their ruler, and I placed a small thought in
the world. I examined all with flame and fire through my thought, and all they
did they did through me.
There was trouble and strife around the seraphim and the cherubim, whose
glory will perish, and commotion around Adonaios, on every side, and
around their dwelling place, all the way to the world ruler, who said, “Let us
seize him.” Others said, “This plan will never work out.” For Adonaios knows
me, through hope.
In the Mouths of Lions (55, 9–56, 20)
I was in the mouths of lions. They hatched a plot against me, to counter the
destruction of their error and foolishness, but I did not give in to them as they
had planned. I was not hurt at all. Though they punished me, I did not die in
actuality but only in appearance, that I might not be put to shame by them, as if
they are part of me. I freed myself of shame, and I did not become fainthearted
because of what they did to me. I would have become bound by fear, but I
suffered only in their eyes and their thought, that nothing may ever be claimed
about them. The death they think I suffered they suffered in their error and
blindness. They nailed their man to their death. Their thoughts did not perceive
 me, since they were deaf and blind. By doing these things they pronounce
judgment against themselves. As for me, they saw me and punished me, but
someone else, their father, drank the gall and the vinegar; it was not I. They were

striking me with a scourge, but someone else, Simon, bore the cross on his
shoulder. Someone else wore the crown of thorns. And I was on high, poking fun
at all the excesses of the rulers and the fruit of their error and conceit. I was
laughing at their ignorance.
Coming Down Past the Rulers (56, 20–57, 7)
I brought all their powers into subjection. When I came down, no one saw me,
for I kept changing my forms on high, transforming from shape to shape, so
when I was at their gates, I assumed their likeness. I passed by them quietly. I
saw their realms, but I was not afraid or ashamed, because I was pure. I was
speaking with them and mingling with them, through those who are mine.
Jealously I trampled on those who are harsh toward them, and I put out the
fire. I was doing all this by my will, to complete what I willed in the will of the
Father above.
Bringing Up the Child of the Majesty from the Region Below
(57, 7–58, 13)
We brought the child of the Majesty, hidden in the region below, to the height.
There I am, in the aeons that no one has seen or understood, where the wedding
of the wedding robe is. It is the new wedding, not the old, and it does not perish,
for the new bridal chamber is of the heavens, and it is perfect.
As I have revealed, there are three ways, and this is an undefiled mystery in
the spirit of the eternal realm that is not destroyed or divided or even discussed,
for it is indivisible, universal, and permanent.
The soul from on high will not discuss error here or carry herself away
from these realms that are here. She will be carried forth when she is liberated
and treated nobly in the world, and she stands before the Father with no
difficulty or fear, forever communing with the mind of ideal power. These will
see me from every side with no animosity, for they see me, and they are seen,
mingling with them. They did not put me to shame, and they were not ashamed.
They were not afraid in my presence, and they will pass by every gate without
fear and be perfected in the third glory.
The Crucifixion Interpreted (58, 13–59, 19)
The world was not receptive to my visible exaltation, my third immersion in an
image that was perceptible. The flame of the seven authorities was

extinguished, the sun of the powers of the rulers set, darkness overcame them,
and the world became impoverished. They bound this one with many bonds and
nailed him to the cross, and they secured him with four bronze nails. He ripped
the temple veil with his own hands. An earthquake shook earth’s chaos, for the
souls of the dead were released and resurrected, and they walked out in the open.
They laid aside ignorant jealousy and lack of insight by the dead tombs, and
they put on the new person. They had come to know the blessed, perfect one of
the eternal, incomprehensible Father and the infinite light. That’s what I am.
When I came to my own and united them with me, there was no need for
many words. Our thought was one with their thought, so they understood what I
was saying. We made plans for the destruction of the rulers, and in this I did the
will of the Father. That’s what I am.
Opposed and Persecuted in the World (59, 19–60, 12)
When we left our home and came down to this world and became embodied in
the world, we were hated and persecuted both by those who are ignorant and by
those who claim to be enriched with the name of Christ, though they are vain
and ignorant. Like irrational animals they do not know who they are. They hate
and persecute those whom I have liberated. If these people would only shut
their mouths for once, they would start weeping and groaning in futility, because
 they have not really known me. Rather, they have served two masters—
and even more.
You, however, will be winners in everything, in combat, fights, and schism
with jealousy and anger. In the uprightness of our love, we are innocent, pure,
and good, and we have the mind of the Father in an ineffable mystery.
The Opponents Are Insignificant and Ignorant
(60, 13–62, 1)
It was a joke, I tell you, it was a joke. The rulers do not know that all this is an
ineffable unity of undefiled truth like what is among the children of light. They
have imitated it, and they proclaim the doctrine of a dead man, along with false
teachings that mock the freedom and purity of the perfect assembly. In their
doctrine they bind themselves to fear and slavery and worldly concerns and
improper forms of worship, for they are ignorant and of no significance. They do
not accept the nobility of truth. They hate the one to whom they belong, and they
love the one to whom they do not belong.
They do not have the knowledge of the Majesty, that it is from above,

from the fountain of truth and not from slavery, jealousy, fear, and love of the
material world. Boldly and freely they make use of what is not theirs and what is
theirs. They do not covet because of their authority and their law that addresses
what they desire. And those who are without the law are in dire straits: they do
not have it and they still desire. These people mislead folks who through them
resemble those who have the truth of their freedom, so as to place us under a
yoke and coerce us with anxiety and fear. One person is subjected to bondage;
another is controlled by God through threats and violent force.
Noble people of the fatherhood, however, are not controlled, since they
control themselves by themselves, without command or force. They belong to
the thought of the fatherhood, and they are one with their will, that the
fatherhood may be perfect and inexpressible through the living water.
The Perfect People Who Live in Harmony and Friendship
(62, 1–27)
Be wise among yourselves, not only in words that are heard but also in deeds,
in words that are fulfilled. In this way those who are perfect are worthy to be
established and united with me, and they will have no enmity. With good
friendship I do everything through the one who is good, for this is the unity of
truth, that people should have no adversary. If some cause division, they do not
learn wisdom, because they cause division and are not friends. They are
enemies. But those who live in the harmony and friendship of love of brother
and sister, naturally and not only of necessity, completely and not merely in part,
those truly reflect the will of the Father. This is universal and perfect love.
Adam and His Descendants Were a Joke (62, 27–64, 17)
Adam was a joke. He was created by the ruler of the seventh realm in a phony
way, in the shape of a human, as though he had become stronger than I and my
siblings. We are blameless toward him, and we have not sinned.
Abraham was a joke, as were Isaac and Jacob, since they were called
patriarchs in a phony way by the ruler of the seventh realm, as though he
had become stronger than I and my siblings. We are blameless toward him, and
we have not sinned.
David was a joke, since his son was named Son of Humanity and was put
in power by the ruler of the seventh realm, as though he had become stronger
than I and my kin. We are blameless toward him; we have not sinned.
Solomon was a joke, since he became arrogant through the ruler of the

seventh realm and thought he was the anointed, as though he had become
stronger than I and my siblings. We are blameless toward him; I have not sinned.
The twelve prophets were a joke, since they appeared as imitations of the
true prophets. They came in a phony way through the ruler of the seventh realm,
as though he had become stronger than I and my siblings. We are blameless
toward him, and we have not sinned.
Moses was a joke, called a faithful servant and friend. The testimony
about him was wrong, since he never knew me. He did not know me, and none
of those before him, from Adam to Moses and John the Baptizer, knew me or
 my siblings. They had instruction from angels to observe food laws and
submit to bitter slavery. They never knew truth and they never will, because their
souls are enslaved and they can never find a mind with freedom to know, until
they come to know the Son of Humanity. On account of my Father, I was the one
the world did not know, and for this reason it rose up against me and my
siblings. But we are blameless toward it; we have not sinned.
The Ruler of the World Is a Joke (64, 17–65, 2)
The ruler was a joke, for he said, “I am God, and no one is greater than I. I alone
am Father and Lord, and there is no other beside me. I am a jealous god, and I
bring the sins of the fathers upon the children for three and four generations”53—
as though he had become stronger than I and my siblings. We are blameless
toward him, and we have not sinned. In this way we mastered his doctrine, but
he is conceited and does not agree with our Father. So through our friendship we
overcame his doctrine, since he is arrogant and conceited and does not agree
with our Father. He was a joke, with his judgment and false prophecy.
I Am Christ (65, 2–67, 27)
O you who cannot see! You do not perceive that on account of your blindness
this is one unknown. Neither did those people ever know or understand him.
They would not listen to an accurate account of him, and so they practiced their
lawless justice and raised their filthy, murderous hands against him as if they
were beating the air. Those who are mindless and blind are always mindless,
always slaves of law and worldly fear.
I am Christ, Son of Humanity, one from you who is within you. For you I am
despised, that you may dismiss what is impermanent. Don’t become female, lest
you give birth to evil and what is related, jealousy, dissension, anger, wrath,
dishonesty, and greed.

To you I am an ineffable mystery. Once, before the foundation of the world,
when the whole multitude of the assembly in the realm of the Eight came
together and made plans, they united in spiritual marriage. The marriage
was consummated in these ineffable places by means of a living word, through
the mediator Jesus, who dwells in all of them and rules over them with pure
profound love. He transformed himself and appeared as a single manifestation
of all of them, as Thought, Father, One. He stands apart from them, for he came
forth all by himself.
He is life,
he from the Father of truth,
ineffable, perfect,
the Father of those there,
the unity of peace,
friend of the good,
eternal life and spotless joy,
in complete harmony of life and faith,
through eternal life
of fatherhood, motherhood, sisterhood,
and rational wisdom.
These were one with mind
that extends itself,
that will extend itself,
in joyful union.
He is honored 
and listens faithfully
to the One.
This is
in fatherhood, motherhood, brotherhood
of the word,
and wisdom.
This is a wedding of truth,
incorruptible rest,
in a spirit of truth,
in every mind,
perfect light
in unnamed mystery.

This does not happen and will not happen among us in any regions and
locales where there is dissension and disruption of peace. Rather, this is union, a
feast of love, and all are fulfilled in the One Who Is. This love also is to be
found in the regions under heaven that are joined to the realms above. Those
who have come to know me through salvation and unity, and those who have
lived for the glory of the Father and truth, once were separate, but they have
been united with the One through the living word.
I Am with Those Who Are Friends (67, 28–68, 25)
I am in the spirit and truth of motherhood, where unity is, and I am with those
who are always friends to each other. They know nothing of enmity and
wickedness, but they are united by my knowledge in word and peace,
which dwells completely with everyone and in everyone. Those who have taken
on the likeness of my form will take on the likeness of my word, and they will
emerge in the light forever, in mutual friendship and the spirit. They have come
to know fully and completely that the One Who Is is one, and all are one. They
have been taught about the One and the assembly and the members of the
assembly. For the Father of the All is immeasurable and immutable, mind, word,
division, jealousy, fire, yet he is simply one, all in all in a single principle,
because all are from a single spirit.
Why Did You Not Know the Mystery? (68, 25–69, 20)
O you who cannot see, why really didn’t you know the mystery? The archons
around Yaldabaoth were disobedient because of the thought that came down to
him from Sophia the sister of thought, and they got together with those who
were with them in a conflagration of fiery cloud, which was their jealousy,
along with all the others produced by their own creatures. They acted as though
they had brought together the noble pleasure of the assembly. Instead they
showed their own collective ignorance through a phony image of fire and earth
and murderer. They are few, they are uneducated, and they are ignorant. They
were bold to do these things, but they did not understand that light associates
with light and darkness with darkness, and what is impure associates with what
is perishable and what is imperishable with what is pure.
This Is What I Have Given You (69, 20–70, 12)
This is what I have presented to you. I am Jesus the Christ, Son of Humanity,

exalted above the heavens. You who are perfect and undefiled, I have presented
this to you on account of the mystery that is undefiled and perfect and ineffable,
that you understand that we ordained these things before the foundation of the
world, so that when we appear throughout the world, we may present the
symbols of incorruption from the spiritual union with knowledge. You do
not know this because of the cloud of flesh that overshadows you.
It is I who am the friend of Sophia. From the beginning I have been close to
the Father, where the children of truth are, and the Majesty. Rest in me, my
friends in spirit, my brothers and sisters, forever.
