Authoritative Discourse
The Origin of the Soul Is from Above (22, 1–22)
...... in heaven…in him…anyone appears…the hidden heavens…appear, and
[before] the invisible, ineffable worlds became visible.
From these came the invisible soul of righteousness, one member with them,
one body with them, one spirit with them. Whether she is coming down or is in
the realm of Fullness, she is not apart from them, but they see her and she looks
at them, through the invisible word.
The Word Is Like Food and Medicine for the Soul (22, 22–23, 4)
Secretly her bridegroom obtained the word. He held it to her mouth to make her
eat it like food. He applied it to her eyes like medicine to make her see with her
mind, and perceive those who are kin to her, and learn about her root, that she
may be able to hold on to the branch from which she has come, receive what is
hers, and renounce matter.......
The Soul Is Like a Child Among Stepchildren (23, 4–25, 12)
[When a man marries a woman] who already has children, the natural children
[of the man], conceived from his semen, call the children of the woman “our
siblings.” Similarly, when the spiritual soul was cast into a body, it became a
sibling to lust, hatred, and envy, that is, to material souls. So the body came from
lust, and lust came from material substance. That is why the soul became a
sibling to them. Yet they are stepchildren, unable to inherit from the male, but
they will inherit from their mother alone.
When the soul wishes to inherit along with the stepchildren—for the
possessions of the stepchildren are exalted passions, life’s pleasures, hateful
jealousies, boastful expressions, foolish experiences, reproachful words
.......
…[If a soul who is ignorant chooses a spirit of prostitution], he casts [her]
out [and throws] her into a brothel. He [has left] her to [corruption, because] she
[has abandoned] modesty.

Death and life are placed before everyone, and people choose for themselves
which of these two they want.
That soul will fall into drinking too much wine in a corrupt manner. Wine
corrupts. The soul forgets her siblings and her father, and sensual pleasures and
sweet things deceive her. She has abandoned knowledge and has fallen into the
life of an animal. A person devoid of sense lives like a beast, not knowing what
one should say or should not say.
The gentle child inherits with joy from the father, and the father rejoices over
his child, because everyone praises the father on account of the child, and the
child also looks for a way to duplicate what was received.
The stepchildren....... [Their lust cannot] mix with [sobriety].
If a lustful thought arises in a person who is a virgin, that person [already]
has become contaminated. This sort of appetite cannot mix with moderation.
This Is Like Wheat Mixed with Chaff (25, 12–27)
For if chaff is mixed with wheat, it is not the chaff that is contaminated but the
wheat. Since they are mixed together, no one will buy the contaminated wheat.
They will coax the dealer and say, “Give us this chaff,” for they see the wheat
mixed with it. Then they will take the chaff and throw it out with the rest of the
chaff, and that chaff will become mixed with all other material stuff.
Pure seed is kept in storehouses that are secure.
We now have discussed all these things.
The Father Establishes a Contest in the World
(25, 27–26, end or 27, beginning)
Before anything was, the Father alone existed, before the worlds in the heavens
appeared, or the world on earth, or principalities or authorities or powers
...... appeared…and [they produced others].
Nothing came to be without the Father’s will.
The Father wished to reveal his [wealth] and his glory, and so he established
a great contest in this world. He wanted to make the contestants come up and
leave behind what is of the created world, and despise these things with exalted,
incomprehensible knowledge, and run to the one who is. We are to be triumphant
over the ignorance of those who contend with us, the adversaries who contend
against us, through our knowledge, for we already have known the inscrutable
one from whom we have come. We have nothing in this world, or else the
world’s authority that came to be might hold us back in the worlds of the

heavens, where death is universal, surrounded by individual.......
We Withdraw from the World (27, beginning–25)
…[the powers] of the world, [who oppose us].
We now have been put to shame [in the] worlds, but we are not interested in
them when they speak ill of us. We ignore them when they curse us. We stare at
them in silence when they treat us shamefully, directly to our face.
They go about their business, and we go about in hunger and thirst, looking
to our dwelling place, which we perceive through our lifestyle and our
conscience. We do not hang on to created things, but we withdraw from them.
Our hearts are set on what truly is, and although we are sick, weak, and in pain,
there is great strength hidden within us.
The Word Heals the Soul’s Blindness (27, 25–28, 22)
Our soul is sick because she lives in a house of poverty, and matter strikes her
eyes in order to blind her. For this reason the soul pursues the word and applies it
to her eyes as medicine, and she <opens> her eyes and casts off 
[blindness]...... thought of…blindness…after that, if such a one is in ignorance
once again, that one is in complete darkness and is a material being. That is why
the soul always [takes] a word and applies it to her eyes as medicine, so that she
may be able to see. Then her light may overwhelm the foes that oppose her,
and she may blind them with her light, capture them in her presence, make them
collapse in exhaustion, and act boldly with her strength and her scepter.
The Soul Finds Shelter in Her Treasure-House (28, 22–29, 3)
While her enemies look at her in shame, she flees up to her treasure-house,
where her mind is, and to her storehouse, which is secure. No one in creation has
been able to grasp her, and she has taken no stranger into her house. Many of
those born in her house oppose her day and night, and they do not rest  day
or night, for their lust oppresses them.
We Are Like Fish That May Be Caught in Nets (29, 3–17)
This is why we do not fall asleep and forget about the nets, hidden from view,
that are lying in place to catch us. For if we are caught in a single net, it will
swallow us down within it, and water will wash over us and splash into our
faces, and we shall be pulled down into the dragnet. We shall not be able to

come up from the deep, because the water is high above us, flowing down from
above, making our hearts sink down in filthy mud. We shall not be able to get
away from them.
We Shall Be Consumed by Man-Eaters (29, 17–30, 4)
Man-eaters will grab us and consume us, and they will enjoy themselves like a
fisherman who is casting a hook and line into the water. For a fisherman casts
different kinds of bait into the water, because each kind of fish has its own food.
The fish smells the food and swims after the fragrance of the food, but when it
bites into the bait, the hook hidden within snares it and draws it up by force from
the deep water. Nobody can catch that fish down in the deep water  unless a
fisherman finds a way to trap it. By tricking the fish with food, the fisherman has
caught the fish on the hook.
The Adversary Tries to Poison Us with the Food of This World (30, 4–25)
We live like this in the world, like fish. The adversary is on the lookout for us
and is lying in wait for us, like a fisherman, to catch us. The adversary is
delighted to consume us. [He dangles] many kinds of food before our eyes, the
stuff of this world, because he hopes to make us desire just one kind of food and
to taste only a little of it, that he then may catch us with his hidden poison and
take us from freedom into slavery. For when he catches us with a single kind of
food, we cannot help but desire the rest of the food. In the end, such things
become the food of death.
The Devil Lies in Wait with Food (30, 26–31, 24)
These are the kinds of food with which the devil lies in wait for us. First he
plants pain in your heart so that you feel heartache over something trivial in this
life, and he catches us with his poisons. After that he introduces the desire for an
article of clothing, so that you will be proud  of it, and then love of money,
pride, vanity, envy rivaling envy, beauty of body, and covetousness. The worst of
all these are ignorance and laziness.
All such kinds of food the adversary prepares in an attractive way and
spreads it out before the body. The adversary wants to make the thought of the
soul turn the soul to some kind of food, and thus he hopes to overwhelm her.
As with a hook he draws the soul by force, in ignorance, and deceives her, until
she conceives evil and bears fruit of matter and behaves badly, pursuing many

desires and cravings, seduced in ignorance by the pleasure of the flesh.
The Soul Finally Eats the Food of Life
(31, 24–32, 16)
The soul who has tasted these things has come to realize that sweet passions are
fleeting. She has learned about evil, has forsaken these passions, and has adopted
a new lifestyle.
After her experiences, the soul disdains this life, because it lasts only for a
time. She seeks the kinds of food that will bring her life,  and she leaves
behind the food of falsehood. She learns about the light, and she goes about and
strips off this world. Her true garment clothes her within, and her bridal gown
reveals beauty of mind rather than pride of flesh. She learns about the depth of
her being. She runs into her sheepfold as her shepherd stands at the door. In
return for all the shame and scorn she experienced in this world, she receives ten
thousand times as much grace and glory.
The Soul Has a True Shepherd (32, 16–33, 3)
The soul returned the body to those who had given it to her. They were ashamed,
and those who deal in bodies sat down and wept because they could not do their
business with that body, and that was the only commodity they had.
They had gone to great pains to shape the body for this soul, and they had
intended to bring down the invisible soul.
Now they were ashamed of what they had done, for they lost what they had
worked hard to accomplish. They did not realize that the soul has an invisible
spiritual body, but they thought, “We are her shepherd and we feed her.” They
did not realize that she knows  another way, hidden from them. This is what
her true shepherd taught her, in knowledge.
The Ignorant Are More Wicked Than Pagans (33, 4–34, 32)
Those, however, who are ignorant do not seek God, and they do not look for
their dwelling place, which is a place of rest, but instead they live like animals.
They are more wicked than pagans. To begin with, they do not inquire about
God. Their hardheartedness drags them down so that they act in a cruel manner.
Then, if they find someone asking about salvation, in their hardness of heart they
work on that person. If the person keeps on asking, they kill him with their
cruelty, and they think they have done something good for themselves. Without a

doubt, they are children of the devil. Even pagans give to charity, and they
know that God who is in the heavens exists, the Father of the universe, exalted
over the idols they worship,  although they have not heard the word, so as to
inquire about the ways of God.
The mindless person hears the call, but is ignorant of the place to which he or
she has been called. He has not asked during the preaching, “Where is the temple
into which I should go and worship my hope?” Such a person is mindless and
worse than a pagan, for pagans know the way to their temples of stone, which
will perish, and they worship their idol, with their hearts set upon it, because this
is their hope. The word has been preached to this mindless person, and it has
taught him, “Seek and inquire about the ways you should go, for there is nothing
as important as this.” So the substance of the hardness of heart strikes the
person’s mind, with the force of ignorance and the demon of error, and these
things prevent the person’s mind from recovering and being capable of working
at seeking and understanding hope.
The Rational Soul Learns About God and Comes to Rest
(34, 32–35, 24)
The rational soul, on the other hand,  has worked at seeking, and she has
learned about God. She has struggled to inquire, enduring bodily distress,
wearing out her feet after the preachers, and learning about the inscrutable one.
She has found her rising.
She has come to rest in the one who is at rest.
She has reclined in the bridal chamber.
She has eaten of the banquet
for which she has hungered.
She has partaken of immortal food.
She has found what she has sought.
She has received rest from her labors,
and the light shining on her does not set.
To the light belongs the glory
and the power and the revelation,
forever and ever.
Amen.
Authoritative Discorse
