EXCERPT FROM PLATO’S REPUBLIC

“Since we have reached this point in the discussion, let’s return to the first things said to us. We shall find that someone says, ‘Good for one who has been treated in a completely unjust way, for that one is justly glorified.’ Wasn’t that one refuted in this way?” “Yes, in exactly that way.” I said, “Now then, we have spoken of this because someone has said that the unjust and the just both have power.” “How is that?” “That person said, ‘The reasoning faculty of the soul is an image with nothing like it,’ and the one who said this will understand.” “The person [said, ‘Is] it really [like this] or not? We [say it] is for me.’ But all these [mythical figures] that the rulers have revealed now turn out to be natural creatures, including Chimera and Cerberus and all the rest that are mentioned. They all have come down and have cast off forms and images and have become a single image. It was said, ‘Do it now.’ The single image has become the image of a complex, many-headed beast, often like the image of a wild beast, and then it can cast off the first image. All these rough and rugged forms come from that image with some effort, for they are formed arrogantly. And all that resemble them are formed through the word, and this now is a single image. Further, the image of a lion is one thing and the image of a human is another. The [image of what] is joined is a single [image], and this [is] much more complex [than the] first image. And the second image [is] small.” “It has been formed.” “Now then, join them together and make the three into a single one, so that they grow together and all are in a single image, the outward image of a human who cannot see what is inside but only what is outside. And it is apparent what creature the image is in, and that it was formed in a human image. “I spoke with one who said that it is profitable for a person to act unjustly. But one who acts unjustly really does not profit or find any good. What is profitable for a person is this: to cast down every image of the evil beast and trample them along with the images of the lion. But the human being is weak in this respect, and everything he does is weak. So he is drawn to the place where he first spends time with them. He does [not reconcile them to each other or take them] to himself, but they put up a [fight] against anyone hostile among [them]. They devour each other in animosity. Yes, he said all this to everyone who praises unjust actions.” “And isn’t it profitable to speak justly?” “If a person does these things and speaks about them, these things take firm hold within a person. For this reason in particular a person tries to care for them and nourishes them as a farmer nourishes the produce day by day and the wild beasts keep it from growing.”