The Discourse on the
Eighth and Ninth
Introduction to the Ceremony (52, 1–55, 22)
“[My father], yesterday you promised [me you would take] my mind to the
eighth stage and after that you would take me to the ninth. You said this is the
sequence of the tradition.”
“Yes, my child, this is the sequence, but the promise was made about human
nature. I told you this when I initiated the promise, and I said it on the condition
that you will remember each of the stages. After I received the spirit through the
power, I established the action for you. Clearly understanding resides in you. In
me it is as if the power were pregnant, for when I conceived from the spring that
flows to me, I gave birth.”
“Father, you have spoken every word rightly to me, but I am amazed at what
you say. You said, ‘The power in me.’”
He said, “I gave birth to the power, as children are born.”
“Then, father, I have many siblings if I am to be counted among the
generations.”
“Right, my child. This good thing is counted...... always. So, my child,
you must know your siblings and honor them rightly and well, since they have
come from the same father. I have addressed each of the generations. I have
named them, since they are offspring like these children.”
“Then, father, do they also have mothers?”
“My child, they are spiritual, for they exist as forces nurturing other souls.
That is why I say they are immortal.”
“Your word is true, and from now on it cannot be refuted. Father, begin the
discourse on the eighth and ninth, and count me also with my siblings.”
“Let us pray, my child, to the Father of the All, with your siblings, who are
my children, that he may grant the spirit and I may speak.”
“How do they pray, father, when they are united with the generations?
Father, I want to obey.” 
“....... [This is not from necessity] or law. Rather, one rests [in] her [and she
loves] him, and loving makes you remember the progress you have experienced

as wisdom from the books. My child, think of your early years of life. Like a
little child you have raised senseless and foolish questions.”
“Father, I have experienced progress and foreknowledge from the books, and
they are greater than what is lacking. These matters are my first concern.”
“My child, when you understand the truth of your statement, you will find
your siblings, who are my children, praying with you.”
“Father, I understand nothing else than the beauty I have experienced in the
books.”
“This is what you call the beauty of the soul—the edification you have
experienced in stages. May understanding come to you, and you will become
wise.”
“Father, I have understood each of the books, and especially …that is
in….”
“My child,… in praises from those who raise [them].”
“Father, I shall receive from you the power of the discourse [you will] utter.
As it was spoken to the two of us, father, let us pray.”
“My child, it is fitting for us to pray to God with all our mind and all our
heart and our soul, and to ask him that the gift of the eighth reach us, and that
each receive from him what belongs to him. Your job is to understand, mine is to
be able to utter the discourse from the spring that flows to me.”
Prayer for the Ascent to the Eighth and Ninth (55, 23–57, 25)
“Let us pray, father:
I call upon you,
who rules over the kingdom of power,
whose word is an offspring of light,
whose words are immortal,
eternal, immutable,
whose will produces life for forms everywhere,
whose nature gives form to substance,
by whom  souls, [powers], and angels are moved,
[whose] word [reaches all] who exist,
whose forethought reaches everyone [in] that [place],
[who] produces everyone,
who has [divided] the eternal realm among spirits,
who has created everything,
who, being self within self, supports everything,

being perfect,
the invisible God to whom one speaks in silence,
whose image is moved when it is managed,
and it is so managed,
mighty one in power,
who is exalted above majesty,
who is superior to those honored,
Z XATHAZ
A
EE
OOOOO
UUUUUU
Z ZAZ TH.
Lord, grant us wisdom from your power that reaches us,
that we may relate to ourselves the vision of the eighth and ninth.
Already we have advanced to the seventh,
since we are faithful
and abide in your law.
Your will we fulfill always.
We have walked in  [your way]
[and have] renounced [evil],
so the vision may come.
Lord, grant us truth in the image.
Grant that through spirit we may see
the form of the image that lacks nothing,
and accept the reflection of the Fullness
from us through our praise.
Recognize the spirit within us.
From you the universe received soul.
From you, one unbegotten,
the begotten one came to be.
The birth of the self-begotten is through you,
the birth of all begotten things that exist.
Accept these spiritual offerings from us,
which we direct to you
with all our heart, soul, and strength.

Save what is within us,
and grant us immortal wisdom.”
Vision of the Eighth and Ninth (57, 26–61, 17)
“My child, let us embrace in love. Be happy about this. Already from this, the
power that is light is coming to us. I see, I see ineffable depths. How shall I tell
you,  my child? [We now have begun to see]…the places. How [shall I tell
you about] the All? I am [mind and] I see another mind, one that [moves] the
soul. I see the one that moves me from pure forgetfulness. You give me power. I
see myself. I wish to speak. Fear seizes me. I have found the beginning of the
power above all powers, without beginning. I see a spring bubbling with life. I
have said, my child, that I am mind. I have seen. Language cannot reveal this.
For all of the eighth, my child, and the souls in it, and the angels, sing a hymn
in silence. I, mind, understand.”
“How does one sing a hymn through silence?”
“Can no one communicate with you?”
“I am silent, father. I want to sing a hymn to you while I am silent.”
“Then sing it. I am mind.”
“I understand mind—‘Hermes,’ which cannot be explained because it stays
in itself. I am happy, father, to see you smiling. The universe  [is happy]. No
creature will lack your life, for you are lord of the inhabitants everywhere. Your
forethought keeps watch. I call you father, aeon of aeons, spirit, divine being,
who through spirit sends moisture on everyone. What do you tell me, father
Hermes?”
“My child, I say nothing about this. It is right before God for us to remain
silent about what is hidden.”
“Trismegistus, do not let my soul be deprived of the vision. O divine being,
everything is possible for you as master of the universe.”
“Sing <praise> again, my child, and sing while you are silent. Ask what you
want in silence.”
When he finished praising, he called out, “Father Trismegistus, what shall I
say? We have received this light, and I myself see this same vision in you. I see
the eighth, and the souls in it, and the angels singing a hymn to the ninth and its
powers. I see the one with the power of them all, creating  <those> in the
spirit.”
“From [now on] it is good for us to remain silent, with head bowed. From
now on do not speak about the vision. It is fitting to sing [a hymn] to the Father
until the day we leave the body.”

“What you sing, father, I also want to sing.”
“I am singing a hymn in myself. While you rest, sing praise. You have found
what you seek.”
“But is it right, father, for me to sing praise when my heart is filled?”
“What is right is for you to sing praise to God so it may be written in this
imperishable book.”
“I shall offer up the praise in my heart as I invoke the end of the universe,
and the beginning of the beginning, the goal of the human quest, the immortal
discovery, the producer of light and truth, the sower of reason, the love of
immortal life. No hidden word can speak of you, lord. My mind wants to sing a
hymn to you every day. I am the instrument of your spirit, mind is your
plectrum, and your guidance makes music with me. I see  myself. I have
received power from you, for your love has reached us.”
“Right, my child.”
“O grace! After this, I thank you by singing a hymn to you. You gave me life
when you made me wise. I praise you. I invoke your name hidden in me,
A
EE
III
OOOOO
UUUUU

You exist with spirit.
I sing to you with godliness.”
Instructions for the Preservation of the Text (61, 18–63, 32)
“My child, copy this book for the temple at Diospolis, in hieroglyphic
characters, and call it the Eighth Reveals the Ninth.”
“I shall do it, <father>, as you command.”
“<My child>, copy the contents of the book on turquoise steles. My child,
it is fitting to copy this book on turquoise steles in hieroglyphic characters, for
mind itself has become the supervisor  of these things. So I command that
this discourse be carved in stone and that you put it in my sanctuary. Eight
guards watch over it with nine of the sun: the males on the right have faces of
frogs, the females on the left have faces of cats. Put a square milk-stone at the

base of the turquoise tablets and copy the name on the azure stone tablet in
hieroglyphic characters. My child, you must do this when I am in Virgo, and
the sun is in the first half of the day, and fifteen degrees have passed by me.”
“Father, all you say I shall gladly do.”
“Copy an oath in the book, so that those who read the book may not use the
wording for evil purposes or try to subvert fate. Rather, they should submit to the
law of God, and not transgress at all, but in purity ask God for wisdom and
knowledge. And whoever  is not begotten beforehand by God develops
through the general and instructional discourses. Such a person will not be able
to read what is written in this book, even though the person’s conscience is pure
within and the person does nothing shameful and does not go along with it. Such
a person progresses by stages and advances in the way of immortality, and so
advances in the understanding of the eighth that reveals the ninth.”
“I shall do it, father.”
“This is the oath: I adjure you who will read this holy book, by heaven and
earth and fire and water, and seven rulers of substance and the creative spirit in
them, and the <un>begotten God and the self-begotten and the begotten, that
you guard what Hermes has communicated. God will be at one with those who
keep the oath and everyone we have named, but the wrath of each of them will
come upon those who violate the oath. This is the perfect one who is, my child.”
