The Apostles Set Sail (1, 1–2, 6)
…[words] that…occasion…as follows: it happened when we [were sent] out to [preach]…we, the apostles,…that we sailed, while we…of the body, with others who were anxious of [heart].

Still, we were one of [mind], and we decided to complete the ministry to which the lord appointed us. We came to an agreement with each other, and we went down to the sea at the right time, which we learned from the master. We discovered a ship moored at the shore, ready to sail, and we spoke with the sailors of the ship about whether we could come aboard with them. They were very friendly to us, as was arranged by the master.

It happened that after we put out to sea, we sailed for a day and a night. Then a wind blew the ship and brought us to a small city in the middle of the sea.
I, Peter, asked residents standing on the dock about the name of this city.
[One] of [them] answered [and said, “The name] of this [city is ‘Abide’— that] is to say, establish yourself—‘[in]-endurance.’ So your leader within [you will]…a palm branch at the edge….”

The Apostles Meet a Man Giving Out Pearls (2, 7–3, 31)
Now, when we went ashore [with the] baggage, I entered the city to inquire… about lodging. A man came out wearing a linen cloth bound around his waist with a gold belt, and a shawl was tied on his chest, going over his shoulders and covering his head and hands.

I was staring at the man, because he was good-looking in appearance and demeanor. I saw four parts of his body: the soles of his feet, a portion of his chest, the palms of his hands, and his face. That was all I could see.

There was a bound book like that of an official in his left hand and a staff of styrax wood in his right hand. He spoke slowly, with a resonating voice, and called out in the city, “Pearls! Pearls!”

I was assuming he was a resident of that city, and I said to him, “My brother and my friend.” [He answered] me [and said, “You] are [right] to say, ‘[My brother and] my friend.’ What do you [want] from me?”

I said to him, “[I want to ask] you [about] lodging for me and my brothers, since we are strangers here.”

He said [to] me, “That is why I said, ‘My brother and my friend,’ for I too am a stranger along with you.”

When he said this, he called out again, “Pearls! Pearls!”

The wealthy people of that city heard his voice and came out of their hidden chambers. Some were peering out of the rooms of their houses; others looked from their upper windows. They saw nothing in him, for there was no bag over his shoulder and no bundle within his linen cloth or shawl.

In their arrogance they did not even ask who he was, and he in turn did not make himself known to them. They went back to their rooms and said, “Is this man mocking us?”

The Poor Approach the Man Offering Pearls (3, 32–5, 1)
The poor [of that city] also heard [his voice, and they approached] the man [who offered to sell this pearl and said to him], “Please [show us the] pearl so that [at least we can see] it. We are [poor] and don’t have the money to buy it. But [show it to us], and then we can tell our friends that [we saw] a pearl with our own eyes.”

He answered and said to them, “If you can, come to my city, so that I may not only show it to you but may give it to you free of charge.”

When the poor of that city heard this, they said, “We are beggars, and we know that nobody gives a pearl to a beggar. Beggars usually get bread and money. So we ask you this favor, that you show us the pearl, and then we can brag to our friends that we saw a pearl with our own eyes. For this does not happen among poor people, especially beggars like us.”

He answered and said to them, “If you can, you should come to my city, that I may not only show it to you but may give it to you free of charge.”

The poor and the beggars rejoiced because of the man [who gives] free of charge.

The Man Named Lithargoel Discusses Hardships (5, 1–6, 28)
Some people [asked]…10 about hardships. Peter replied and told [them] what he heard on the way, for they had endured hardships in their ministry.

He said to the man who offered to sell the pearl, “I would like to know your name and what hardships there are on the way to your city. We are strangers and servants of God, and we must be obedient and spread God’s word in every city.”

The man answered and said, “Since you ask, my name is Lithargoel, which means ‘light bright stone.’ And concerning the way to this city, which you also have asked about, I shall tell you. None can travel that road unless they renounce all their possessions and fast daily from one night’s stay to the next. There are many robbers and wild beasts on that road. If people

take bread on the road, black dogs kill them because of the bread. If they carry expensive garments of this world, robbers kill them [because of the] garments. [If they carry] water, [wolves kill them because of the water], for the wolves are thirsty. [If they] are concerned about [meat] and vegetables, lions eat them because of the meat, and [if] they get away from the lions, bulls devour them because of the vegetables.”

When he said this to me, I groaned within and said, “What great hardships are on the way! May Jesus give us the strength to walk this path.”

He saw that my face was downcast and that I was groaning, and he said to me, “Why are you groaning if you know the name of Jesus and believe in him? He is a power great enough to give you strength. For I also believe in the Father who has sent him.”

I asked him again, “What is the name of the city you are going to?”

He said to me, “This is the name of my city: In nine gates let us praise God, and consider that the tenth gate is the main gate.”

After this I left him in peace and went to call my friends.

Peter Learns About Abiding in Endurance (6, 28–7, 19)
I saw waves and huge walls of water around the shores of the city, and I was amazed at the marvelous things I saw. Then I saw an old man sitting there, and I asked him if the name of the city was really [the one] he had [given when he said, “Abide-in-endurance].”

He said to me, “[You speak] the truth. We abide here because [we] endure.”

I answered and said, “Rightly…have people called endurance the first virtue. Cities are populated with people [who] endure their temptations, and a noble kingdom comes from them, because they endure through the deceptions and difficulties of the storms. This goes to show how the city of everyone who bears the burden of the yoke of faith will be populated, and these sorts of people will be included in the kingdom of heaven.”

Peter and the Others Go to the City of Lithargoel (7, 19–8, 13)
I rushed off and called my friends, that we might go to the city to which
Lithargoel directed us. In a pact of faith we renounced everything, as he had told us. We avoided the robbers because they did not find the garments they were looking for with us. We avoided the wolves because they did not find the water they were thirsty for with us. We avoided the lions because they did not find the meat they wanted with us. [We avoided the bulls because…they did not find any] vegetables. We [were filled with] great joy and freedom from care, in peace, [in] our master. We [rested] in front of the gate and talked together. This was not a casual conversation about this world. Rather, we lingered in a deep discussion of the faith, and we recalled the robbers we avoided on the way.

Lithargoel Appears and Reveals That He Is Christ (8, 13–9, 17)
Lithargoel appeared, and he looked different from before. Now he took the form of a doctor with a medicine case under his arm, and there was a young student following him with a bag full of medicine. We did not recognize him.

Peter spoke up and said, “We wish you to do us a favor, since we are strangers. Take us to the house of Lithargoel before evening comes.”

He said, “With an upright heart I shall show it to you. But I wonder how you know this fine man. He does not reveal himself to everyone, because he is the son of a great king. Rest a little while, and I shall go and treat this patient and then return.”

He hurried off, and he returned soon.
He said to Peter, “Peter!”

Peter was startled that he knew his name was Peter. Peter responded to the
Savior, “How do you know me, for you called me by my name?”

Lithargoel answered, “I want to ask you, who gave you the name Peter?”

He said to him, “It was Jesus Christ, the son of the living God. He gave me this name.”

He answered and said, “It is I. Recognize me, Peter.”

He loosened the garment be was wearing, the one he had put on so that we did not recognize him.

Lithargoel Sends the Apostles Out (9, 17–10, 30)
When he revealed to us that this really was he, we fell down and worshiped him.
We were eleven disciples. He reached out his hand and made us stand up. We spoke with him in a humble manner, and with our heads bowed down in modesty we said, “We shall do whatever you wish. Just give us the strength always to do what you wish.”

He gave them the medicine case and the bag that was in the student’s hand, and he offered these instructions and said, “Return to the city you came from, called Abide-and-remain-in-endurance, and teach all who have believed in my name that I too have endured adversities of faith. I shall grant you your reward. To the poor of that city give what they need to live, until I present to them what is better, about which I told <them>, ‘I shall give it to you free of charge.’”

Peter answered and said to him, “Master, you have taught us to renounce the world and everything in it. We have forsaken these things for your sake. Now we are concerned only about food for a single day. Where can we find what the poor need, which you ask us to give to them?”

The master answered and said, “Peter, it was necessary for you to understand the parable I told you. Don’t you know that my name, which you teach, is worth more than all riches, and the wisdom of God is worth more than silver and gold and precious stones?”

The Apostles Are to Heal Bodies and Souls (10, 31–12, 22)
He gave them the bag of medicine and said, “Heal all the people of the city who are sick and believe [in] my name.”

Peter was afraid to take issue with the master a second time, so he motioned to John, who was next to him: “You say something this time.”

John answered and said, “We are afraid to say too much in your presence, but you have asked us to practice this art. We have not been taught to be doctors. How, then, shall we know how to heal bodies, as you have told us?”

He answered him, “You have said it well, John: ‘I know that the doctors of this world heal what is of the world, but the doctors of souls heal the heart.’ So, first heal bodies, that through the real powers of healing their bodies, with no medicine of this world, they may come to believe in you, that you also have the power to heal sicknesses of the heart.

“As for the wealthy people of this city, who did not even bother to ask who I was but reveled in their wealth and arrogance, do not dine with them in their houses and do not have fellowship with them, or their partiality may influence you. For many people in the churches have shown partiality to the rich, and thus they sin and also lead others to sin. Judge them in uprightness, that your ministry may be glorified and my name also may be glorified in the churches.”

The disciples answered and said, “Yes, in truth, this is what we should do.”

They fell down and worshiped him. He made them stand up, and he departed from them, in peace.
Amen.
